God's command comes; so seek not to hasten it. Glory be to Him! High be He exalted above that they associate with Him!
He sends down the angels with the Spirit of His command upon whomsoever He will among His servants, saying: Give you warning that there is no God but I; so fear you Me!
He created the heavens and the earth in truth; high be He exalted above that they associate With Him!
He created man of a sperm-drop; and, behold, he is a manifest adversary.
And the cattle -- He created them for you; in them is warmth, and uses various, and of them you eat,
and there is beauty in them for you, when you bring them home to rest and when you drive them forth abroad to pasture;
and they bear your loads unto a land that you never would reach, excepting with great distress. Surely your Lord is All-clement, All-compassionate.
And horses, and mules, and asses, for you to ride, and as an adornment; and He creates what you know not.
God's it is to show the way; and some do swerve from it. If He willed, He would have guided you all together.
It is He who sends down to you out of heaven water of which you have to drink, and of which trees, for you to pasture your herds,
and thereby He brings forth for you crops, and olives, and palms, and vines, and all manner of fruit. Surely in that is a sign for a people who reflect.
And He subjected to you the night and day, and the sun and moon; and the stars are subjected by His command. Surely in that are signs for a people who understand.
And that which He has multiplied for you in the earth of diverse hues. Surely in that is a sign for a people who remember.
It is He who subjected to you the sea, that you may eat of it fresh flesh, and bring forth out of it ornaments for you to wear; and thou mayest see the ships cleaving through it; and that you may seek of His bounty, and so haply you will be thankful.
And He cast on the earth firm mountains, lest it shake with you, and rivers and ways; so haply you will be guided;
and waymarks; and by the stars they are guided.
Is He who creates as he who does not create? Will you not remember?
If you count God's blessing, you will never number it; surely God is All-forgiving, All-compassionate.
And God knows what you keep secret and what you publish.
And those they call upon, apart from God, created nothing, and themselves are created,
dead, not alive; and are not aware when they shall be raised.
Your God is One God. And they who believe not in the world to come, their hearts deny, and they have waxed proud.
Without a doubt God knows what they keep secret and what they publish; He loves not those that wax proud.
And when it is said to them, 'What has your Lord sent down?' they say, 'Fairy-tales of the ancients.'
That they may bear their loads complete on the Day of Resurrection, and some of the loads of those that they lead astray without any knowledge. O evil the load they bear!
Those that were before them contrived; then God came upon their building from the foundations, and the roof fell down on them from over them, and the chastisement came upon them from whence they were not aware.
Then on the Day of Resurrection He will degrade them, saying, 'Where are My associates concerning which you made a breach together?' Those that were given the knowledge will say, 'Degradation today and evil are on the unbelievers,
whom the angels take while still they are wronging themselves.' Then they will offer surrender: 'We were doing nothing evil. 'Nay; but surety God has knowledge of the things you did.
So enter the gates of Gehenna, there to dwell forever.' Evil is the lodging of those that wax proud.
And it shall be said to the godfearing, 'What has your Lord sent down?' They will say, 'Good! For those who do good in this world good; and surely the abode of the world to come is better; excellent is the abode of the godfearing --
Gardens of Eden they shall enter, underneath which rivers flow, wherein they shall have all they will. So God recompenses the godfearing,
whom the angels take while they are goodly, saying, 'Peace be on you! Enter Paradise for that you were doing.'
Do they look for aught but that the angels shall come to them, or thy Lord's command shall come? So did those before them, and God wronged them not, but themselves they wronged.
So the evil things that they wrought. smote them, and they were encompassed by that they mocked at.
The idolators say, 'If God had willed we would not have served; apart from Him, anything, neither we nor our fathers, nor would we have forbidden, apart from Him, anything.' So did those before them; yet is aught for the Messengers, but to deliver the manifest Message?
Indeed, We sent forth among every nation a Messenger,; saying: 'Serve you God, and eschew idols.' Then some. of them God guided, and some were justly disposed to error. So journey in the land, and behold how was the end of them that cried lies.
Though thou art ever so eager to guide them, God guides not those whom He leads astray; they have no helpers.
have sworn by God the most earnest oaths God will never raise up him who dies; nay, it is a promise binding upon Him, but most men know not,
so that He may make clear to them that whereon they were at variance, and that the unbelievers may know that they were truly liars.
The only words We say to a thing, when We desire it, is that We say to it 'Be,' and it is.
And those that emigrated in God's cause after they were wronged -- We shall surely lodge them in this world in a goodly lodging, and the wage of the world to come is greater, did they but know;
even such men as are patient, and put their trust in their Lord.
We sent not any before thee, except men to whom We revealed: 'Question the people of the Remembrance, if it should be that you do not know --
with the clear signs, and the Psalms; and We have sent down to thee the Remembrance that thou mayest make clear to mankind what was sent down to them; and so haply they will reflect.
Do they feel secure, those who devise evil things, that God will not cause the earth to swallow them, or that the chastisement will not come upon them, from whence they are not aware?
Or that He will not seize them in their going to and fro, and they will not be able to frustrate Him?
Or that He will not seize them, little by little destroying them? Surely thy Lord is All-clement, All-compassionate.
Have they not regarded all things that God has created casting their shadows to the right and to the left, bowing themselves before God in all lowliness?
To God bows everything in the heavens, and every creature crawling on the earth, and the angels. They have not waxed proud;
they fear their Lord above them, and they do what they are commanded.
God says: 'Take not to you two gods. He is only One God; so have awe of Me.'
To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and earth; His is the religion for ever. Then will you fear other than God?
Whatsoever blessing you have, it comes from God; then when affliction visits you it is unto Him that you groan.
Then, when He removes the affliction from you, lo, a party of you assign associates to their Lord,
that they may show unthankfulness for that We have given them. So take your joy; certainly you will soon know!
And they appoint a share of that We have provided them to what they know not. By God, you shall be questioned as to that you forged.
And they assign to God daughters; glory be to Him! -- and they have their desire;
and when any of them is given the good tidings of a girl, his face is darkened and he chokes inwardly,
as he hides him from the people because of the evil of the good tidings that have been given unto him, whether he shall preserve it in humiliation, or trample it; into the dust. Ah, evil is that they judge!
Those who believe not in the world to come, theirs is the evil likeness; God's is the loftiest likeness; He is the All-mighty, the All-wise.
If God should take men to task for their evildoing, He would not leave on the earth one creature that crawls; but He is deferring them to a term stated; and when their term is come they shall not put it back by a single hour nor put it forward.
They assign to God that they themselves dislike; and their tongues describe falsehood, that the reward most fair shall be theirs. Without any doubt theirs shall be the Fire, and they are hastened in.
By God, assuredly We sent Messengers to nations before thee, but Satan decked out fair to them their deeds; he is their protector today, and there yet awaits them a painful chastisement.
And We have not sent down upon thee the Book except that thou mayest make clear to them that whereon they were at variance, and as a guidance and as a mercy to a people who believe.
And it is God who sends down out of heaven water, and therewith revives the earth after it is dead. Surely in that is a sign for a people who have ears.
And surely in the cattle there is a lesson for you; We give you to drink of what is in their bellies, between filth and blood, pure milk, sweet to drinkers.
And of the fruits of the palms and the vines, you take therefrom an intoxicant and a provision fair. Surely in that is a sign for a people who understand.
And thy Lord revealed unto the bees, saying: 'Take unto yourselves, of the mountains, houses, and of the trees, and of what they are building.
Then eat of all manner of fruit, and follow the ways of your Lord easy to go upon.' Then comes there forth out of their bellies a drink of diverse hues wherein is healing for men. Surely in that is a sign for a people who reflect.
God created you; then He will gather you to Him; and some of you will be kept back unto the vilest state of life, that after knowing somewhat, they may know nothing; God is All-knowing, All-powerful.
And God has preferred some of you over others in provision;, but those that were preferred shall not give over their provision to that their right hands possess, so that they may be equal therein. What, and do they deny God's blessing?
God has appointed for you of yourselves wives, and He has appointed for you of your wives sons and grandsons, and He has provided you of the good things. What, do they believe in vanity, and do they disbelieve in God's blessing?
And do they serve, apart from God, that which has no power to provide them anything from the heavens and the earth and can do nothing?
So strike not any similitudes for God; surely God knows, and you know not.
God has struck a similitude: a servant possessed by his master, having no power over anything, and one whom We have provided of Ourselves with a provision fair, and he expends of it secretly and openly. Are they equal? Praise belongs to God! Nay, most of them know not.
God has struck a similitude: two men, one of them dumb, having no power over anything, and he is a burden upon his master -- wherever he despatches him, he brings no good. Is he equal to him who bids to justice, and is on a straight path?
To God belongs the Unseen in the heavens and in the earth. And the matter of the Hour is as a twinkling of the eye, or nearer. Surely God is powerful over everything.
And it is God who brought you forth from your mothers' wombs, and He appointed for you hearing, and sight, and hearts, that haply so you will be thankful.
Have they not regarded the birds, that are subjected in the air of heaven? Naught holds them but God; surely in that are signs for' a people who believe.
And it is God who has appointed a place of rest for you of your houses, and He has appointed for you of the skins of the cattle houses you find light on the day that you journey, and on the day you abide, and of their wool, and of their fur, and of their hair furnishing and an enjoyment for a while.
And it is God who has appointed for you coverings of the things He created, and He has appointed for you of the mountains refuges, and He has appointed for you shirts to protect you from the heat, and shirts to protect you from your own violence. Even so He perfects His blessing upon you, that haply you will surrender.
So, if they turn their backs, thine it is only to deliver the manifest Message.
They recognize the blessing of God, then they deny it, and the most of them are the unthankful.
And the day We shall raise up from every nation a witness, then to the unbelievers no leave shall be given, nor shall they be suffered to make amends.
And when the evildoers behold the chastisement, it shall not be lightened for them, and no respite shall be given them.
And when the idolaters behold their associates, they shall say, 'Our Lord, these are our associates on whom we called apart from Thee.' They will fling back at them the saying, 'Surely, you are truly liars.'
And they will offer God surrender that day, and there shall go astray from them that they were forging.
Those that disbelieve and bar from the way of God -- them We shall give increase of chastisement upon chastisement, for that they were doing corruption.
And the day We shall raise up from every nation a witness against them from amongst them, and We shall bring thee as a witness against those. And We have sent down on thee the Book making clear everything, and as a guidance and a mercy, and as good tidings to those who surrender.
Surely God bids to justice and good-doing and giving to kinsmen; and He forbids indecency, dishonour, and insolence, admonishing you, so that haply you will remember.
Fulfil God's covenant, when you make covenant, and break not the oaths after they have been confirmed, and you have made God your surety; surely God knows the things you do.
And be not as a woman who breaks her thread, after it is firmly spun, into fibres, by taking your oaths as mere mutual deceit, one nation being more numerous than another nation. God only tries you thereby; and certainly He will make clear to you upon the Day of Resurrection that whereon you were at variance.
If God had willed, He would have made you one nation; but He leads astray whom He will, and guides whom He will; and you will surely be questioned about the things you wrought.
Take not your oaths as mere mutual deceit, lest any foot should slip after it has stood firm, and you should taste evil, for that you barred from the way of God, and lest there should await you a mighty chastisement.
And do not sell the covenant of God for a small price; surely what is with God -- that is better for you, did you but know.
What is with you comes to an end, but what is with God abides; and surely We shall recompense those who were patient their wage, according to the best of what they did.
And whosoever does a righteous deed, be it male or female, believing, We shall assuredly give him to live a goodly life; and We shall recompense them their wage, according to the best of what they did.
When thou recitest the Koran, seek refuge in God from the accursed Satan;
he has no authority over those who believe and trust in their Lord;
his authority is over those who take him for their friend and ascribe associates to God.
And when We exchange a verse in the place of another verse and God knows very well what He is sending down -- they say, 'Thou art a mere forger!' Nay, but the most of them have no knowledge.
Say: 'The Holy Spirit sent it down from thy Lord in truth, and to confirm those who believe, and to be a guidance and good tidings to those who surrender.'
And We know very well that they say, 'Only a mortal is teaching him.' The speech of him at whom they hint is barbarous; and this is speech Arabic, manifest.
Those that believe not in the signs of God, God will not guide; there awaits them a painful chastisement.
They only forge falsehood, who believe not in the signs of God, and those -- they are the liars.
Whoso disbelieves in God, after he has believed -- excepting him who has been compelled, and his heart is still at rest in his belief -- but whosoever's breast is expanded in unbelief, upon them shall rest anger from God, and there awaits them a mighty chastisement;
that, because they have preferred the present life over the world to come, and that God guides not the people of the unbelievers.
Those -- God has set a seal on their hearts, and their hearing, and their eyes, and those -- they are the heedless ones;
without a doubt, in the world to come they will be the losers.
Then, surely thy Lord -- unto those who have emigrated after persecution, then struggled and were patient -- surely thy Lord thereafter is All-forgiving, All-compassionate.
The day that every soul shall come disputing in its own behalf; and every soul shall be paid in full for what it wrought, and they shall not be wronged.
God has struck a similitude: a city that was secure, at rest, its provision coming to it easefully from every place, then it was unthankful for the blessings of God; so God let it taste the garment of hunger and of fear, for the things that they were working.
There came indeed to them a Messenger from amongst them, but they cried him lies; so they were seized by the chastisement while they were evildoers.
So eat of what God has provided you lawful and good; and be you thankful for the blessing of God, if it be Him that you serve.
These things only He has forbidden you: carrion, blood, the flesh of swine, what has been hallowed to other than God. Yet whoso is constrained, not desiring nor transgressing, God is All-forgiving, All-compassionate.
And do not say, as to what your tongues falsely describe, 'This is lawful; and this is forbidden, so that you may forge against God falsehood; surely those who forge against God falsehood shall not prosper.
A little enjoyment, then for them awaits a painful chastisement.
And those of Jewry -- We have forbidden them what We related to thee before, and We wronged them not, but they wronged themselves.
Then, surely thy Lord -- unto those who did evil in ignorance, then repented after that and put things right -- surely thy Lord thereafter is All-forgiving, All-compassionate.
Surely, Abraham was a nation obedient unto God, a man of pure faith and no idolater,
showing thankfulness for His blessings; He chose him, and He guided him to a straight path.
And We gave him in this world good, and in the world to come he shall be among the righteous.
Then We revealed to thee: 'Follow thou the creed of Abraham, a man of pure faith and no idolater.'
The Sabbath was only appointed for those who were at variance thereon; surely thy Lord will decide between them on the Day of Resurrection, touching their differences.
Call thou to the way of thy Lord with wisdom and good admonition, and dispute with them in the better way. Surely thy Lord knows very well those who have gone astray from His way, and He knows very well those who are guided.
And if you chastise, chastise even as you have been chastised; and yet assuredly if you are patient, better it is for those patient.
And be patient; yet is thy patience only with the help of God. And do not sorrow for them, nor be thou straitened for what they devise.
Surely God is with those who are godfearing, and those who are good-doers.
