Sad. By the Koran, containing the Remembrance --
nay, but the unbelievers glory in their schism.
How many a generation We destroyed before them, and they called, but time was none to escape.
Now they marvel that a warner has come to them from among them; and the unbelievers say, 'This is a lying sorcerer.
What, has he made the gods One God? This is indeed a marvellous thing.'
And the Council of them depart, saying 'Go! Be steadfast to your gods; this is a thing to be desired.
We have not heard of this in the last religion; this is surely an invention.
What, has the Remembrance been sent down on him out of us all?' Nay, but they are in doubt of My Remembrance; nay, they have not yet tasted My chastisement.
Or have they the treasuries of thy Lord's mercy, the All-mighty, the All-giving?
Or is theirs the kingdom of the heavens and earth and of what between them is? Why, then let them ascend the cords!
A very host of parties is routed there!
Cried lies before them the people of Noah, and Ad, and Pharaoh, he of the tent-pegs,
and Thamood, and the people of Lot, and the men of the Thicket - those were the parties;
not one, that cried not lies to the Messengers, so My retribution was just.
These are only awaiting for a single Cry, to which there is no delay.
They say, 'Our Lord, hasten to us our share before the Day of Reckoning.'
Bear patiently what they say, and remember Our servant David, the man of might; he was a penitent.
With him We subjected the mountains to give glory at evening and sunrise,
and the birds, duly mustered, every one to him reverting;
We strengthened his kingdom, and gave him wisdom and speech decisive.
Has the tiding of the dispute come to thee? When they scaled the Sanctuary,
when they entered upon David, and he took fright at them; and they said, 'Fear not; two disputants we are -- one of us has injured the other; so judge between us justly, and transgress not, and guide us to the right path.'
'Behold, this my brother has ninety-nine ewes, and I have one ewe. So he said, "Give her into my charge"; and he overcame me in the argument.'
Said he, 'Assuredly he has wronged thee in asking for thy ewe in addition to his sheep; and indeed many intermixers do injury one against the other, save those who believe, and do deeds of righteousness -- and how few they are!' And David thought that We had only tried him; therefore he sought forgiveness of his Lord, and he fell down, bowing, and he repented.
Accordingly We forgave him that, and he has a near place in Our presence and a fair resort.
'David, behold, We have appointed thee a viceroy in the earth; therefore judge between men justly, and follow not caprice, lest it lead thee astray from the way of God. Surely those who go astray from the way of God -- there awaits them a terrible chastisement, for that they have forgotten the Day of Reckoning.'
We have not created the heavens and earth, and what between them is, for vanity; such is the thought of the unbelievers, wherefore woe unto the unbelievers because of the Fire!
Or shall We make those who believe and do righteous deeds as the workers of corruption in the earth, or shall We make the godfearing as the transgressors?
A Book We have sent down to thee, Blessed, that men possessed of minds may ponder its signs and so remember.
And We gave unto David Solomon; how excellent a servant he was! He was a penitent.
When in the evening were presented to him the standing steeds,
he said, 'Lo, I have loved the love of good things better than the remembrance of my Lord, until the sun was bidden behind the veil.
Return them to me!' And he began to stroke their shanks and necks.
Certainly We tried Solomon, and We cast upon his throne a mere body; then he repented.
He said, 'My Lord, forgive me, and give me a kingdom such as may not befall anyone after me; surely Thou art the All-giver.'
So We subjected to him the wind, that ran at his commandment, softly, wherever he might light on,
and the Satans, every builder and diver
and others also, coupled in fetters:
'This is Our gift; bestow or withhold without reckoning.'
And he had a near place in Our presence and a fair resort.
Remember also Our servant Job; when he called to his Lord, 'Behold, Satan has visited me with weariness and chastisement.'
'Stamp thy foot! This is a laving-place cool, and a drink.'
And We gave to him his family, and the like of them with them, as a mercy from us, and a reminder unto men possessed of minds;
and, 'Take in thy hand a bundle of rushes, and strike therewith, and do not fail in thy oath.' Surely We found him a steadfast man. How excellent a servant he was! He was a penitent.
Remember also Our servants Abraham, Isaac and Jacob -- men of might they and of vision.
Assuredly We purified them with a quality most pure, the remembrance of the Abode,
and in Our sight they are of the chosen, the excellent.
Remember also Our servants Ishmael, Elisha, and Dhul Kifl; each is among the excellent.
This is a Remembrance; and for the godfearing is a fair resort,
Gardens of Eden, whereof the gates are open to them,
wherein they recline, and wherein they call for fruits abundant, and sweet potions,
and with them maidens restraining their glances of equal age.
'This is what you were promised for the Day of Reckoning;
this is Our provision, unto which there is no end.'
All this; but for the insolent awaits an ill resort,
Gehenna, wherein they are roasted - an evil cradling!
All this; so let them taste it - boiling water and pus,
and other torments of the like kind coupled together.
'This is a troop rushing in with you; there is no Welcome for them; they shall roast in the Fire.'
They say, 'No, it is you have no Welcome; you forwarded it for us; how evil a stablishment!'
They say, 'Our Lord, whoso forwarded this for us, give him a double chastisement in the Fire!'
They say, 'How is it with us, that we do not see men here that we counted among the wicked?
What, did we take them for a laughing-stock? Or have our eyes swerved away from them?'
Surely that is true -- the disputing of the inhabitants of the Fire.
Say: 'I am only a warner. There is not any god but God, the One, the Omnipotent,
Lord of the heavens and earth, and of what between them is, the All-mighty, the All-forgiving.'
Say: 'It is a mighty tiding
from which you are turning away.
I had no knowledge of the High Council when they disputed.
This alone is revealed to me, that I am only a clear warner.'
When thy Lord said to the angels, 'See, I am creating a mortal of a clay.
When I have shaped him, and breathed My spirit in him, fall you down, bowing before him!'
Then the angels bowed themselves all together,
save Iblis; he waxed proud, and was one of the unbelievers.
Said He, 'Iblis, what prevented thee to bow thyself before that I created with My own hands? Hast thou waxed proud, or art thou of the lofty ones?'
Said he, 'I am better than he; Thou createdst me of fire, and him Thou createdst of clay.'
Said He, 'Then go thou forth hence; thou art accursed.
Upon thee shall rest My curse, till the Day of Doom.'
Said he, 'My Lord, respite me till the day they shall be raised.'
Said He, 'Thou art among the ones that are respited
until the day of the known time.'
Said he, 'Now, by Thy glory, I shall pervert them all together,
excepting those Thy servants among them that are sincere.'
Said He, 'This is the truth, and the truth I say;
I shall assuredly fill Gehenna with thee, and with whosoever of them follows thee, all together.'
Say: 'I ask of you no wage for it, neither am I of those who take things upon themselves.
It is nothing but a reminder unto all beings,
and you shall surely know its tiding after a while.'
