Those who disbelieve and bar from God's way, God will send their works astray.
But those who believe and do righteous deeds and believe in what is sent down to Muhammad -- and it is the truth from their Lord -- He will acquit them of their evil deeds, and dispose their minds aright.
That is because those who disbelieve follow falsehood, and those who believe follow the truth from their Lord. Even so God strikes their similitudes for men.
When you meet the unbelievers, smite their necks, then, when you have made wide slaughter among them, tie fast the bonds; then set them free, either by grace or ransom, till the war lays down its loads. So it shall be; and if God had willed, He would have avenged Himself upon them; but that He may try some of you by means of others. And those who are slain in the way of God, He will not send their works astray.
He will guide them, and dispose their minds aright,
and He will admit them to Paradise, that He has made known to them.
O believers, if you help God, He will help you, and confirm your feet.
But as for the unbelievers, ill chance shall befall them! He will send their works astray.
That is because they have been averse to what God has sent down, so He has made their works to fail.
What, have they not journeyed in the land and beheld how was the end of those before them? God destroyed them; the unbelievers shall have the likes thereof.
That is because God is the Protector of the believers, and that the unbelievers have no protector.
God shall surely admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens underneath which rivers flow. As for the unbelievers, they take their enjoyment and eat as cattle eat; and the Fire shall be their lodging.
How many a city that was stronger in might than thy city which has expelled thee have We destroyed! And there was no helper for them.
What, is he who is upon a clear sign from his Lord like unto such a one unto whom his evil deeds have been decked out fair, and they have followed their caprices?
This is the similitude of Paradise which the godfearing have been promised: therein are rivers of water unstaling, rivers of milk unchanging in flavour, and rivers of wine -- a delight to the drinkers, rivers, too, of honey purified; and therein for them is every fruit, and forgiveness from their Lord -- Are they as he who dwells forever in the Fire, such as are given to drink boiling water, that tears their bowels asunder?
And some of them there are give ear to thee, till, when they go forth from thee, they say to those who have been given knowledge, 'What said he just now?' Those are they upon whose hearts God has set a seal, and they have followed their caprices.
But those who are guided aright, them He increases in guidance, and gives them their godfearing.
Are they looking for aught but the Hour, that it shall come upon them suddenly? Already its tokens have come; so, when it has come to them, how shall they have their Reminder?
Know thou therefore that there is no god but God, and ask forgiveness for thy sin, and for the believers, men and women. God knows your going to and fro, and your lodging.
Those who believe say, 'Why has a sura not been sent down?' Then, when a clear sura is sent down, and therein fighting is mentioned, thou seest those in whose hearts is sickness looking at thee as one who swoons of death; but better for them would be
obedience, and words honourable. Then, when the matter is resolved, if they were true to God, it would be better for them.
If you turned away, would you then haply work corruption in the land, and break your bonds of kin?
Those are they whom God has cursed, and so made them deaf, and blinded their eyes.
What, do they not ponder the Koran? Or is it that there are locks upon their hearts?
Those who have turned back in their traces after the guidance has become clear to them, Satan it was that tempted them, and God respited them.
That is because they said to those who were averse to what God sent down, 'We will obey you in some of the affair'; and God knows their secrets.
How shall it be, when the angels take them, beating their faces and their backs?
That is because they have followed what angers God, and have been averse to His good pleasure, so He has made their works to fail.
Or did those in whose hearts is sickness think that God would not bring to light their rancour?
Did We will, We would show them to thee, then thou wouldst know them by their mark; and thou shalt certainly know them in the twisting of their speech; and God knows your deeds.
And We shall assuredly try you until We know those of you who struggle and are steadfast, and try your tidings.
Those who disbelieve and bar from God's way and make a breach with the Messenger after the guidance has become clear to them, they will nothing hurt God, and He will make their works to fail.
O believers, obey God, and obey the Messenger, and do not make your own works vain.
Those who disbelieve and bar from God's way and then die disbelieving, them God will not forgive.
So do not faint and call for peace; you shall be the upper ones, and God is with you, and will not deprive you of your works.
The present life is naught but a sport and a diversion; and if you believe and are godfearing, He will give you your wages, and will not ask of you your goods.
If He asks you for them, and presses you, you are niggardly, and He brings to light your rancour.
Ha, there you are; you are called upon to expend in God's way, and some of you are niggardly. Whoso is niggardly is niggardly only to his own soul. God is the All-sufficient; you are the needy ones. If you turn away, He will substitute another people instead of you, then they will not be your likes.
