Qaf. By the glorious Koran!
Nay, but they marvel that a warner has come to them from among them; and the unbelievers say, 'This is a marvellous thing!
What, when we are dead and become dust? That is a far returning!'
We know what the earth diminishes of them; with Us is a book recording.
Nay, but they cried lies to the truth when it came to them, and so they are in a case confused.
What, have they not beheld heaven above them, how We have built it, and decked it out fair, and it has no cracks?
And the earth -- We stretched it forth, and cast on it firm mountains, and We caused to grow therein of every joyous kind
for an insight and a reminder to every penitent servant.
And We sent down out of heaven water blessed, and caused to grow thereby gardens and grain of harvest
and tall palm-trees with spathes compact,
a provision for the servants, and thereby We revived a land that was dead. Even so is the coming forth.
Cried lies before them the people of Noah and the men of Er-Rass, and Thamood,
and Ad and Pharaoh, the brothers of Lot,
the men of the Thicket, the people of Tubba'. Every one cried lies to the Messengers, and My threat came true.
What, were We wearied by the first creation? No indeed; but they are in uncertainty as to the new creation.
We indeed created man; and We know what his soul whispers within him, and We are nearer to him than the jugular vein.
When the two angels meet together, sitting one on the right, and one on the left,
not a word he utters, but by him is an observer ready.
And death's agony comes in truth; that is what thou wast shunning!
And the Trumpet shall be blown; that is the Day of the Threat.
And every soul shall come, and with it a driver and a witness.
'Thou wast heedless of this; therefore We have now removed from thee thy covering, and so thy sight today is piercing.'
And his comrade shall say, 'This is what I have, made ready.'
'Cast, you twain, into Gehenna every froward unbeliever,
every hinderer of the good, transgressor, disquieter,
who set up with God another god; therefore, you twain, cast him into the terrible chastisement.'
And his comrade shall say, 'Our Lord, I made him not insolent, but he was in far error.'
He shall say, 'Dispute not before Me! For I sent you beforehand -- the threat.
The Word is not changed with Me; I wrong not My servants.'
Upon the day We shall say unto Gehenna, 'Art thou filled?' And it shall say, 'Are there any more to come?'
And Paradise shall be brought forward to the godfearing, not afar:
'This is that you were promised; it is for every mindful penitent.'
Whosoever fears the All-merciful in the Unseen, and comes with a penitent heart:
'Enter it in peace! This is the Day of Eternity.'
Therein they shall have whatever they will; and with Us there is yet more.
How many a generation We destroyed before them that was stronger in valour than they, then they searched about in the land; was there any asylum?
Surely in that there is a reminder to him who has a heart, or will give ear with a present mind.
We created the heavens and the earth, and what between them is, in six days, and no weariness touched Us.
So be thou patient under what they say, and proclaim thy Lord's praise before the rising of the sun, and before its setting,
and proclaim thy Lord's praise in the night, and at the ends of the prostrations.
And listen thou for the day when the caller shall call from a near place.
On the day they hear the Cry in truth, that is the day of coming forth.
It is We who give life, and make to die, and to Us is the homecoming.
Upon the day when the earth is split asunder from about them as they hasten forth; that is a mustering easy for Us.
We know very well what they say; thou art not a tyrant over them. Therefore remind by the Koran him who fears My threat.
