By the swift scatterers
and the burden-bearers
and the smooth runners
and the partitioners,
surely that you are promised is true,
and surely the Doom is about to fall!
By heaven with all its tracks
surely you speak at variance,
and perverted therefrom are some.
Perish the conjecturers
who are dazed in perplexity
asking, 'When shall be the Day of Doom?'
Upon the day when they shall be tried at the Fire:
'Taste your trial! This is that you were seeking to hasten.'
Surely the godfearing shall be among gardens and fountains
taking whatsoever their Lord has given them; they were good-doers before that.
Little of the night would they slumber,
and in the mornings they would ask for forgiveness;
and the beggar and the outcast had a share in their wealth.
In the earth are signs for those having sure faith;
and in your selves; what, do you not see?
And in heaven is your provision, and that you are promised.
So by the Lord of heaven and earth, it is as surely true as that you have speech.
Hast thou received the story of the honoured guests of Abraham?
When they entered unto him, saying 'Peace!' he said 'Peace! You are a people unknown to me.'
Then he turned to his household and brought a fattened calf,
and he laid it before them saying, 'Will you not eat?'
Then he conceived a fear of them. They said, 'Be not afraid!' And they gave him good tidings of a cunning boy.
Then came forward his wife, clamouring, and she smote her face, and said, 'An old woman, barren!'
They said, 'So says thy Lord; He is the All-wise, the All-knowing.'
Said he, 'And what is your business, envoys?'
They said, 'We have been sent to a people of sinners,
to loose upon them stones of clay
marked with thy Lord for the prodigal.
So We brought forth such believers as were in it,
but We found not therein except one house of those that have surrendered themselves.
And therein We left a sign to those who fear the painful chastisement.
And also in Moses, when We sent him unto Pharaoh, with a clear authority,
but he turned his back, with his court, saying, 'A sorcerer, or a man possessed!'
So We seized him and his hosts, and We cast them into the sea, and he blameworthy.
And also in Ad, when We loosed against them the withering wind
that left nothing it came upon, but made it as stuff decayed.
And also in Thamood, when it was said to them, 'Take your enjoyment for a while!'
Then they turned in disdain from the commandment of their Lord, and the thunderbolt took them and they themselves beholding
and they were not able to stand upright, and were not helped.
And the people of Noah before; surely they were an ungodly people.
And heaven -- We built it with might, and We extend it wide.
And the earth -- We spread it forth; O excellent Smoothers!
And of everything created We two kinds; haply you will remember.
Therefore flee unto God! I am a clear warner from Him to you.
And set not up with God another god; I am a clear warner from Him to you.
Even so not a Messenger came to those before them but they said, 'A sorcerer, or a man possessed!'
What, have they bequeathed it one to another? Nay, but they are an insolent people.
So turn thou from them; thou wilt not be reproached.
And remind; the Reminder profits the believers.
I have not created jinn and mankind except to serve Me.
I desire of them no provision, neither do I desire that they should feed Me.
Surely God is the All-provider, the Possessor of Strength, the Ever-Sure.
The evildoers shall have their portion, like the portion of their fellows; so let them not hasten Me!
So woe to the unbelievers, for that day of theirs that they are promised.
