By the Star when it plunges,
your comrade is not astray, neither errs,
nor speaks he out of caprice.
This is naught but a revelation revealed,
taught him by one terrible in power,
very strong; he stood poised,
being on the higher horizon,
then drew near and suspended hung,
two bows' length away, or nearer,
then revealed to his servant that he revealed.
His heart lies not of what he saw;
what, will you dispute with him what he sees?
Indeed, he saw him another time
by the Lote-Tree of the Boundary
nigh which is the Garden of the Refuge,
when there covered the Lote-Tree that which covered;
his eye swerved not; nor swept astray.
Indeed, he saw one of the greatest signs of his Lord.
Have you considered El-Lat and El-'Uzza
and Manat the third, the other?
What, have you males, and He females?
That were indeed an unjust division.
They are naught but names yourselves have named, and your fathers; God has sent down no authority touching them. They follow only surmise, and what the souls desire; and yet guidance has come to them from their Lord.
Or shall man have whatever he fancies?
And to God belongs the First and the Last.
How many an angel there is in the heavens whose intercession avails not anything, save after that God gives leave to whomsoever He wills and is well-pleased.
Those who do not believe in the world to come name the angels with the names of females.
They have not any knowledge thereof; they follow only surmise, and surmise avails naught against truth.
So turn thou from him who turns away from Our Remembrance, and desires only the present life.
That is their attainment of knowledge. Surely thy Lord knows very well those who have gone astray from His way, and He knows very well those who are guided.
To God belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth, that He may recompense those who do evil for what they have done, and recompense those who have done good with the reward most fair.
Those who avoid the heinous sins and indecencies, save lesser offences surely thy Lord is wide in His forgiveness. Very well He knows you, when He produced you from the earth, and when you were yet unborn in your mothers' wombs; therefore hold not yourselves purified; God knows very well him who is godfearing.
Hast thou considered him who turns his back
and gives a little, and then grudgingly?
Does he possess the knowledge of the Unseen, and therefore he sees?
Or has he not been told of what is in the scrolls of Moses,
and Abraham, he who paid his debt in full?
That no soul laden bears the load of another,
and that a man shall have to his account only as he has laboured,
and that his labouring shall surely be seen,
then he shall be recompensed for it with the fullest recompense,
and that the final end is unto thy Lord,
and that it is He who makes to laugh, and that makes to weep,
and that it is He who makes to die, and that makes to live,
and that He Himself created the two kinds, male and female,
of a sperm-drop, when it was cast forth,
and that upon Him rests the second growth,
and that it is He who gives wealth and riches,
and that it is He who is the Lord of Sirius,
and that He destroyed Ad, the ancient,
and Thamood, and He did not spare them,
and the people of Noah before -- certainly they did exceeding evil, and were insolent
and the Subverted City He also overthrew,
so that there covered it that which covered.
Then which of thy Lord's bounties disputest thou?
This is a warner, of the warners of old.
The Imminent is imminent;
apart from God none can disclose it.
Do you then marvel at this discourse,
and do you laugh, and do you not weep,
while you make merry?
So bow yourselves before God, and serve Him!
