All that is in the heavens and the earth magnifies God; He is the All-mighty, the All-wise.
To Him belongs the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth; He gives life, and He makes to die, and He is powerful over everything.
He is the First and the Last, the Outward and the Inward; He has knowledge of everything.
It is He that created the heavens and the earth in six days then seated Himself upon the Throne. He knows what penetrates into the earth, and what comes forth from it, -- what comes down from heaven, and what goes up unto it. He is with you wherever you are; and God sees the things you do.
To Him belongs the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth; and unto Him all matters are returned.
He makes the night to enter into the day and makes the day to enter into the night. He knows the thoughts within the breasts.
Believe in God and His Messenger, and expend of that unto which He has made you successors. And those of you who believe and expend shall have a mighty wage.
How is it with you, that you believe not in God seeing that the Messenger is calling you to believe in your Lord, and He has taken compact with you, if you are believers?
It is He who sends down upon His servant signs, clear signs, that He may bring you forth from the shadows into the light. Surely God is to you All-gentle, All-compassionate.
How is it with you, that you expend not in the way of God, and to God belongs the inheritance of the heavens and the earth? Not equal is he among you who spent, and who fought before the victory; those are mightier in rank than they who spent and fought afterwards; and unto each God has promised the reward most fair; and God is aware of the things you do.
Who is he that will lend to God a good loan, and He will multiply it for him, and his shall be a generous wage?
Upon the day when thou seest the believers, men and women, their light running before them, and on their right hands. 'Good tidings for you today! Gardens underneath which rivers flow, therein to dwell for ever; that is indeed the mighty triumph.'
Upon the day when the hypocrites, men and women, shall say to those who have believed, 'Wait for us, so that we may borrow your light!' It shall be said, 'Return you back behind, and seek for a light!' And a wall shall be set up between them, having a door in the inward whereof is mercy, and against the outward thereof is chastisement.
They shall be calling unto them, 'Were we not with you?' They shall say, 'Yes indeed; but you tempted yourselves, and you awaited, and you were in doubt, and fancies deluded you, until God's commandment came, and the Deluder deluded you concerning God.
Therefore today no ransom shall be taken from you, neither from those who disbelieved. Your refuge is the Fire, that is your master -- an evil homecoming!'
Is it not time that the hearts of those who believe should be humbled to the Remembrance of God and the Truth which He has sent down, and that they should not be as those to whom the Book was given aforetime, and the term seemed over long to them, so that their hearts have become hard, and many of them are ungodly?
Know that God revives the earth after it was dead. We have indeed made clear for you the signs, that haply you will understand.
Surely those, the men and the women, who make freewill offerings and have lent to God a good loan, it shall be multiplied for them, and theirs shall be a generous wage.
And those who believe in God and His Messengers -- they are the just men and the martyrs in their Lord's sight; they have their wage, and their light. But the unbelievers, who have cried lies to Our signs, they are the inhabitants of Hell.
Know that the present life is but a sport and a diversion, an adornment and a cause for boasting among you, and a rivalry in wealth and children. It is as a rain whose vegetation pleases the unbelievers; then it withers, and thou seest it turning yellow, then it becomes broken orts. And in the world to come there is a terrible chastisement, and forgiveness from God and good pleasure; and the present life is but the joy of delusion.
Race to forgiveness from your Lord, and a Garden the breadth whereof is as the breadth of heaven and earth, made ready for those who believe in God and His Messengers. That is the bounty of God; He gives it unto whomsoever He will; and God is of bounty abounding.
No affliction befalls in the earth or in yourselves, but it is in a Book, before We create it; that is easy for God;
that you may not grieve for what escapes you, nor rejoice in what has come to you; God loves not any man proud and boastful,
such as are niggardly, and bid men to be niggardly. And whosoever turns away, God is the All-sufficient, the All-laudable.
Indeed, We sent Our Messengers with the clear signs, and We sent down with them the Book and the Balance so that men might uphold justice. And We sent down iron, wherein is great might, and many uses for men, and so that God might know who helps Him, and His Messengers, in the Unseen. Surely God is All-strong, All-mighty.
And We sent Noah, and Abraham, and We appointed the Prophecy and the Book to be among their seed; and some of them are guided, and many of them are ungodly.
Then We sent, following in their footsteps, Our Messengers; and We sent, following, Jesus son of Mary, and gave unto him the Gospel. And We set in the hearts of those who followed him tenderness and mercy. And monasticism they invented -- We did not prescribe it for them -- only seeking the good pleasure of God; but they observed it not as it should be observed. So We gave those of them who believed their wage; and many of them are ungodly.
O believers, fear God, and believe in His Messenger, and He will give you a twofold portion of His mercy; and He will appoint for you a light whereby you shall walk, and forgive you; God is All-forgiving, All-compassionate;
that the People of the Book may know that they have no power over anything of God's bounty, and that bounty is in the hand of God; He gives it unto whomsoever He will; and God is of bounty abounding.
