The Indubitable!
What is the Indubitable?
And what will teach thee what is the Indubitable?
Thamood and Ad cried lies to the Clatterer.
As for Thamood, they were destroyed by the Screamer;
and as for Ad, they were destroyed by a wind clamorous,
violent that He compelled against them seven nights and eight days, uninterruptedly, and thou mightest see the people laid prostrate in it as if they were the stumps of fallen down palm-trees.
Now dost thou see any remnant of them?
Pharaoh likewise, and those before him, and the Subverted Cities -- they committed error,
and they rebelled against the Messenger of their Lord, and He seized them with a surpassing grip.
Lo, when the waters rose, We bore you in the running ship
that We might make it a reminder for you and for heeding ears to hold.
So, when the Trumpet is blown with a single blast
and the earth and the mountains are lifted up and crushed with a single blow,
then, on that day, the Terror shall come to pass,
and heaven shall be split, for upon that day it shall be very frail,
and the angels shall stand upon its borders, and upon that day eight shall carry above them the Throne of thy Lord.
On that day you shall be exposed, not one secret of yours concealed.
Then as for him who is given his book in his right hand, he shall say, 'Here, take and read my book!
Certainly I thought that I should encounter my reckoning.'
So he shall be in a pleasing life
in a lofty Garden,
its clusters nigh to gather.
'Eat and drink with wholesome appetite for that you did long ago, in the days gone by.'
But as for him who is given his book in his left hand, he shall say, 'Would that I had not been given my book
and not known my reckoning!
Would it had been the end!
My wealth has not availed me,
my authority is gone from me.'
'Take him, and fetter him,
and then roast him in Hell,
then in a chain of seventy cubits' length insert him!
Behold, he never believed in God the All-mighty,
and he never urged the feeding of the needy;
therefore he today has not here one loyal friend,
neither any food saving foul pus,
that none excepting the sinners eat.'
No! I swear by that you see
and by that you do not see,
it is the speech of a noble Messenger.
It is not the speech of a poet (little do you believe)
nor the speech of a soothsayer (little do you remember).
A sending down from the Lord of all Being.
Had he invented against Us any sayings,
We would have seized him by the right hand,
then We would surely have cut his life-vein
and not one of you could have defended him.
Surely it is a Reminder to the godfearing;
but We know that some of you will cry lies.
Surely it is a sorrow to the unbelievers;
yet indeed it is the truth of certainty.
Then magnify the Name of thy Lord, the All-mighty.
