O thou shrouded in thy mantle,
arise, and warn!
Thy Lord magnify
thy robes purify
and defilement flee!
Give not, thinking to gain greater
and be patient unto thy Lord.
For when the Trump is sounded
that day will be a harsh day,
for the unbelievers not easy.
Leave Me with him whom I created alone,
and appointed for him ample wealth
and sons standing before him,
and made all things smooth for him;
then he is eager that I should do more.
Nay! He is forward unto Our signs;
and I shall constrain him to a hard ascent.
Lo! He reflected, and determined --
death seize him, how he determined!
Again, death seize him, how he determined!
Then he beheld,
then he frowned, and scowled,
then he retreated, and waxed proud.
He said, 'This is naught but a trumped-up sorcery;
'this is nothing but mortal speech.'
I shall surely roast him in Sakar;
and what will teach thee what is Sakar?
It spares not, neither leaves alone
scorching the flesh;
over it are nineteen.
We have appointed only angels to be masters of the Fire, and their number We have appointed only as a trial for the unbelievers, that those who were given the Book may have certainty, and that those who believe may increase in belief, and that those who were given the Book and those who believe may not be in-doubt, and that those in whose hearts there is sickness, and the unbelievers, may say, 'What did God intend by this as a similitude?' So God leads astray whomsoever He will, and He guides whomsoever He will; and none knows the hosts of thy Lord but He. And it is naught but a Reminder to mortals.
Nay! By the moon
and the night when it retreats
and the dawn when it is white,
surely it is one of the greatest things
as a warner to mortals.
to whoever of you desires to go forward or lag behind.
Every soul shall be pledged for what it has earned,
save the Companions of the Right;
in Gardens they will question
concerning the sinners,
'What thrusted you into Sakar?'
They shall say, 'We were not of those who prayed, and
we fed not the needy,
and we plunged along with the plungers,
and we cried lies to the Day of Doom,
till the Certain came to us.' --
Then the intercession of the intercessors shall not profit them.
What ails them, that they turn away from the Reminder,
as if they were startled asses
fleeing -- before a lion?
Nay, every man of them desires to be -- given -- scrolls unrolled.
No indeed; but they do not fear the Hereafter.
No indeed; surely it is a Reminder;
so whoever wills shall remember it.
And they will not remember, except that God wills; He is worthy to be feared, -- worthy to forgive.
