By the loosed ones successively
storming tempestuously
by the scatterers scattering
and the severally severing
and those hurling a reminder
excusing or warning,
surely that which you are promised is about to fall!
When the stars shall be extinguished,
when heaven shall be split
when the mountains shall be scattered
and when the Messengers' time is set,
to what day shall they be delayed?
To the Day of Decision.
And what shall teach thee what is the Day of Decision?
Woe that day unto those who cry it lies!
Did We not destroy the ancients,
and then follow them with the later folk?
So We serve the sinners.
Woe that day unto those who cry it lies!
Did We not create you of a mean water,
that We laid within a sure lodging
till a known term decreed?
We determined; excellent determiners are We.
Woe that day unto those who cry it lies!
Made We not the earth to be a housing
for the living and for the dead?
Set We not therein soaring mountains? Sated you with sweetest water?
Woe that day unto those who cry it lies!
Depart to that you cried was lies!
Depart to a triple-massing shadow
unshading against the blazing flame
that shoots sparks like dry faggots,
sparks like to golden herds.
Woe that day unto those who cry it lies!
This is the day they shall not speak
neither be given leave, and excuse themselves.
Woe that day unto those who cry it lies!
'This is the Day of Decision; We have joined you with the ancients;
if you have a trick, try you now to trick Me!'
Woe that day unto those who cry it lies!
Truly the godfearing shall dwell amid shades and fountains,
and such fruits as their hearts desire:
'Eat and drink, with wholesome appetite, for that you were working.'
Even so do We recompense the good-doers.
Woe that day unto those who cry it lies!
'Eat and take your joy a little; you are sinners!'
Woe that day unto those who cry it lies!
When it is said to them, 'Prostrate yourselves!' they prostrate not.
Woe that day unto those who cry it lies!
In what discourse after this will they believe?
