By those that pluck out vehemently
and those that draw out violently,
by those that swim serenely
and those that outstrip suddenly
by those that direct an affair!
Upon the day when the first blast shivers
and the second blast follows it,
hearts upon that day shall be athrob
and their eyes shall be humbled.
They shall say, 'What, are we being restored as we were before?
What, when we are bones old and wasted?'
They shall say, 'That then were a losing return!'
But it shall be only a single scare,
and behold, they are awakened.
Hast thou received the story of Moses?
When his Lord called to him in the holy valley, Towa:
'Go to Pharaoh; he has waxed insolent.
And say, "Hast thou the will to purify thyself;
and that I should guide thee to thy Lord, then thou shalt fear?"'
So he showed him the great sign,
but he cried lies, and rebelled,
then he turned away hastily,
then he mustered
and proclaimed, and he said, 'I am your Lord, the Most High!'
So God seized him with the chastisement of the Last World and the First.
Surely in that is a lesson for him who fears!
What, are you stronger in constitution or the heaven He built?
He lifted up its vault, and levelled it,
and darkened its night, and brought forth its forenoon;
and the earth-after that He spread it out,
therefrom brought forth its waters and its pastures,
and the mountains He set firm,
an enjoyment for you and your flocks.
Then, when the Great Catastrophe comes
upon the day when man shall remember what he has striven,
and Hell is advanced for whoever sees,
then as for him who was insolent
and preferred the present life,
surely Hell shall be the refuge.
But as for him who feared the Station of his Lord and forbade the soul its caprice,
surely Paradise shall be the refuge.
They will question thee concerning the Hour, when it shall berth.
What art thou about, to mention it?
Unto thy Lord is the final end of it.
Thou art only the warner of him who fears it.
It shall be as if; on the day they see it, they have but tarried for an evening, or its forenoon.
