Believers, do not push yourselves forward in the presence of God and His Messenger. Fear God -- God hears all and knows all.
Believers, do not raise your voices above the voice of the Prophet, and do not speak as loudly when speaking to him as you do when speaking to one another, lest your actions come to nothing without your realizing it.
Those who lower their voices in the presence of God's Messenger are men whose hearts God has tested for piety, they shall have forgiveness and a great reward,
those who call out to you from outside your apartments are lacking in understanding.
If they waited patiently until you came out to see them, it would be better for them. But God is forgiving and merciful.
Believers, if an evil-doer brings you news, ascertain the correctness of the report fully, lest you unwittingly harm others, and then regret what you have done,
and know that the Messenger of God is among you. If he were to obey you in many things, you would suffer for it. However, God has endeared the faith to you, and beautified it in your hearts, and has made denial of the truth, wickedness, and disobedience hateful to you. People such as these are rightly guided
through God's bounty and favour; God is all knowing, and wise.
If two parties of believers fight against each other, make peace between them; then if after that one of them transgresses against the other, fight the party that transgresses until it submits to the command of God. Then if it complies, make peace between them with equity, and act justly. Truly, God loves the just.
Surely all believers are brothers. So make peace between your brothers, and fear God, so that mercy may be shown to you.
Believers, let not some men among you ridicule others: it may be that the latter are better than the former: nor should some women laugh at others: it may be that the latter are better than the former: do not defame or be sarcastic to each other, or call each other by [offensive] nicknames. How bad it is to earn an evil reputation after accepting the faith! Those who do not repent are evil-doers.
Believers, avoid much suspicion. Indeed some suspicion is a sin. And do not spy on one another and do not backbite. Would any of you like to eat his dead brother's flesh? No, you would hate it. Fear God, God is ever forgiving and most merciful.
Mankind! We have created you from a male and female, and made you into peoples and tribes, so that you might come to know each other. The noblest of you in God's sight is the one who fears God most. God is all knowing and all-aware.
The Arabs of the desert say, "We have believed." Say to them, "You have not believed yet; say rather, "We have submitted," for faith has not yet entered into your hearts. But if you will obey God and His Messenger, He will not detract anything from your good deeds. God is most forgiving and ever merciful."
The believers are only those who have faith in God and His Messenger and then doubt not, but strive, hard with their wealth and their persons for the cause of God. Such are the truthful ones.
Say, "Do you presume to teach God your religion when God knows everything in the heavens and earth? God has knowledge of all things."
They think they have done you a favour by becoming Muslims! Say, "Do not consider your Islam a favour to me. No indeed! It is God who bestowed a favour on you by guiding you to the true faith. [Admit this], if you are telling the truth."
God knows the unseen things of the heavens and the earth. God sees all that you do.
