Qaf. By the glorious Quran!
Indeed, they are astonished that a warner should have come to them from among themselves. So these deniers of the truth say, "This is indeed a strange thing,
to come back to life after we have died and become dust? That is most improbable!"
We know very well what the earth takes away from them: We hold a book which records all things.
But they denied the truth when it came to them, so they are in a state of confusion.
Have they not observed the sky above them and marked how We have built it and adorned it, leaving no flaws in it;
We spread out the earth and set upon it solid mountains and We brought forth from it all kinds of delightful plants,
as a lesson and reminder for every human being who turns to God;
and We have sent down from the sky blessed water with which We have brought forth gardens and grain to be harvested,
and tall palm-trees with their thickly-clustered dates,
as a provision for human beings; and by [all] this We bring dead land to life. Such shall be the Resurrection.
Before them, the people of Noah and the people of Rass denied this truth; and so did the people of Thamud.
And the tribe of 'Ad, and Pharaoh, and the brethren of Lot,
and the dwellers of the Wood, and the people of Tubba': every one denied their messengers, and so My warning came true.
Were We then worn out by the first creation? Yet they are in doubt about a second creation.
We created man -- We know the promptings of his soul, and are closer to him than his jugular vein --
and the two recording angels are recording, sitting on the right and the left:
each word he utters shall be noted down by a vigilant guardian.
The trance of death will come revealing the truth: that is what you were trying to escape.
The trumpet will be sounded. This is the Day [you were] warned of.
Each person will arrive attended by an [angel] to drive him on and another to bear witness.
You were heedless of this, but now We have removed your veil, so your sight today is sharp.
His companion attendant will say, "I have here his record ready."
"Cast into Hell every ungrateful, rebellious one,
hinderer of good, transgressor, causing others to doubt,
who has set up another god besides God: cast him into severe punishment" --
and his associate [Satan] will say, "Lord, I did not make him transgress, he had already gone far astray himself."
God will say, "Do not quarrel in My presence. I gave you the warning beforehand
and My word shall not be changed, nor am I unjust to My servants."
On that Day, We shall ask Hell, "Are you now full?" Hell will answer, "Are there any more?"
Paradise will be brought near to the righteous and will no longer be far away.
This is what you were promised -- this is for everyone who often turned to God and kept Him in mind,
who fears the Compassionate One, though He is unseen, and comes to Him with a penitent heart;
so enter it in peace. This is the Day of everlasting life.
There they shall have all that they desire, and there is even more with Us.
How many a generation, far greater in prowess, have We destroyed before them! They searched the entire land: but could they find a refuge?
There is truly a reminder in this for whoever has a heart, whoever listens attentively.
We created the heavens, the earth, and everything between them in six days [periods] nor were We ever wearied.
So bear with patience what they say, and glorify your Lord with His praise, before the rising and before the setting of the sun;
proclaim His praise in the night and at the end of every prayer.
Hearken! The Day when the caller will call from near.
The Day when men will hear the fateful cry, they will rise up [from their graves].
Truly, it is We who give life and cause death, and to Us shall all return
on the Day the earth will be rent asunder over them, and from it they shall emerge in haste. To assemble them all is easy enough  for Us.
We know best what those who deny the truth say. You are not there to force them: so remind, with this Quran, those who fear My warning.
