The Last Hour draws near and the moon is split asunder.
Yet, when they see a sign they [who deny the truth] turn their backs and say, "The same old sorcery!"
They deny the truth and follow their own whims, every matter has its appointed time,
there has come to them many a tiding wherein there are warnings,
profound in wisdom, but all warnings have been of no avail:
so ignore them. On the Day when the Crier will call out about a horrible event,
with downcast eyes they shall come out of their graves, as if they were locusts milling about
hastening towards the Crier. Those who deny the truth will cry, "This is such a hard day!"
The people of Noah denied [the truth] before them. They belied Our messenger saying, "He is mad!" He was rebuffed,
so he cried out to his Lord, saying, "I am overcome, so help me!"
So We opened the gates of the sky with water pouring down in torrents,
and We caused the earth to burst with gushing springs: so that the waters met for a purpose which had been decreed.
We bore him on an [ark] which, made of planks and nails,
floated on under Our eyes: a vindication of him who had been rejected.
We have left this as a sign: but will anyone take heed?
How terrible then was My punishment and My warning.
We have made it easy to learn lessons from the Quran. Is there anyone who would receive admonition?
The people of 'Ad too rejected the truth. How terrible was My punishment and My warning.
We sent a raging wind against them on a day of continuous calamity.
It swept people away as if they were trunks of uprooted palm trees.
How [dreadful] was My punishment and My warning!
We have made it easy to learn lessons from the Quran: is there anyone who would receive admonition?
The tribe of Thamud also rejected Our warnings:
they said, "Are we to follow a man from amongst ourselves? We would surely then fall into error and madness.
Has the [Divine] message been revealed to him alone of all of us? No, he is a boastful liar."
[We said to him] "Tomorrow they shall know who is the boastful liar,
for We are [going to] send the she-camel as a trial for them, so watch them and be patient.
And tell them that the water [of the well] is to be divided between them, and that each one should drink in turn."
But they called their companion who took a sword and hamstrung her.
How [terrible] were My punishment and My warnings!
Then We sent a single blast against them and they became like dry stubble which has been trampled upon.
Indeed, We have made the Quran easy to learn lessons from. Is there anyone who would receive admonition?
The people of Lot rejected Our warnings.
We sent a sandstorm against them which destroyed them all, except the family of Lot, whom We saved at the break of dawn,
as a blessing from Us: this is how We reward the thankful.
Lot warned them of Our punishment, but they disputed the warnings --
they even wanted to seduce his guests -- but We blinded them, and said, "Taste My punishment now that you have scorned My warnings!" --
and early in the morning the punishment decreed overtook them --
"Taste My punishment now that you have scorned My warnings!"
We have made it easy indeed to learn lessons from the Quran. Is there anyone who would receive admonition?
Surely warners came to the people of Pharaoh.
They, too, rejected all Our signs. So We seized them with the seizure of One Mighty, Omnipotent.
Are your people who deny the truth better than those? Or have you been given immunity in the Scriptures?
Or do they say, "We are a united group, and we are bound to prevail?"
The hosts shall soon be routed and they shall be put to flight.
Indeed, the Hour of Doom is their appointed time, and the Last Hour will be the most severe, and the most bitter.
The evil-doers are indeed sunk in error and folly --
on the Day when they are dragged into the fire on their faces, it will be said to them, "Now feel the touch of Hell!"
We have created everything in due measure;
We command but once: Our will is done in the twinkling of an eye;
We have indeed destroyed many a people like you. Is there anyone who would receive admonition?
All their deeds are recorded in their books:
every action, small or great, is noted down.
The God-conscious will find themselves in gardens and rivers,
in the seat of truth with an all-powerful sovereign.
