When the hypocrites come to you, they say, "We bear witness that you are indeed the Messenger of God." God knows that you are indeed His Messenger, but God bears witness that the hypocrites are surely liars --
they use their oaths as a cover and thus they bar others from God's way: what they have been doing is truly evil --
that is because they believed and then rejected their faith: their hearts are sealed up, so that they are devoid of understanding.
When you see them, their outward appearance pleases you; when they speak, you listen to what they say. But they are like propped up blocks of timber. They think that every shout is directed against them. They are the [real] enemies, so beware of them. The curse of God be upon them! How they turn away!
When they are told, "Come! The Messenger of God will ask forgiveness for you!" they turn their heads away and you see them walking away arrogantly.
It makes no difference whether you ask forgiveness for them or not. God will not forgive them: God does not guide such rebellious people.
They are the ones who say, "Give nothing to those who follow God's Messenger, until they abandon him;" but the treasures of the heavens and the earth belong to God, though the hypocrites do not understand this
[and] they say, "Indeed, when we return to Madinah, [we] the ones most worthy of honour, will surely drive out from there the contemptible ones!" [referring to poor Muslims]. However, all honour belongs to God, and to His Messenger and those who believe [in God]: but of this the hypocrites are not aware.
O believers! Do not let your wealth or your children distract you from remembrance of God. Those who do so will be the losers.
And spend out of what We have provided you with before death comes to one of you and he says, "My Lord! If only You would grant me respite for a little while, then I would give alms and be among the righteous."
But God will not grant a reprieve to a soul when its appointed time has come; God is well-aware of what you do.
