Blessed is He in whose hand is the Kingdom: He has power over all things;
He created death and life so that He might test you, and find out which of you is best in conduct. He is the Mighty, the Most Forgiving One.
He created seven heavens one above the other in layers. You will not find any flaw in the creation of the Gracious One. Then look once again: can you see any flaw?
Then look again and again. Your gaze will come back to you confused and exhausted.
We have adorned the lowest heaven with lamps, and We have made them for driving away devils. For them We have prepared the punishment of the blazing Fire.
Those who are bent on blaspheming against their Lord will have the punishment of Hell: an evil destination.
When they are cast into it, they will hear its roaring as it boils up,
as though bursting with rage. Each time a group is cast into it, its keepers will ask them, "Did no warner come to you?"
They will say, "Of course, a warner did come to us, but we belied him and we said, 'God has revealed nothing; you are in gross error.'"
They will say, "If we had only listened or understood, we should not now be among the inmates of Hell,"
and thus they will confess their sin; far from God's mercy are the inmates of Hell.
As for those who fear their Lord in the unseen will have forgiveness and a rich reward.
Whether you speak in secret or aloud, He knows what is in every heart.
How could He who created not know His own creation, when He alone is the Most Subtle in His wisdom and the All Aware?
It is He who has made the earth subservient to you, so traverse its regions and eat its provisions. To Him you shall all be resurrected.
Do you feel secure that He who is in heaven will not cause the earth to sink beneath you and then begin to quake?
Do you feel secure that the One in heaven will not send against you a whirlwind to pelt you with stones, so that you will know how [true] My warning was?
Those who went before them belied [the truth]: then how great was My rejection of them.
Do they not see the birds above them spreading and closing their wings? None save the Merciful sustains them. Surely, He observes all things.
Who is there to defend you like an army, besides the Lord of Mercy? Those who deny the truth are in deception.
Who can provide for you, if He withholds His provision? Yet they obstinately persist in rebellion and avoidance of the truth.
Is he who walks grovelling upon his face better guided, or he who walks upright upon a straight path?
Say, "It is He who brought you into being, and made ears and eyes and hearts for you, yet you are seldom grateful."
Say, "It is He who has scattered you on the earth; and it is to Him that you shall all be gathered [on the Day of Resurrection].
They ask, "When will this promise be fulfilled, if you are truthful?"
Say, "God alone has knowledge of that; and I am only a plain warner."
But when they see it drawing near, the faces of those who deny the truth will turn gloomy and they will be told, "This is what you were calling for."
Say, "Have you thought: if God destroys me and those who are with me, or treats us mercifully, then who will protect those who deny the truth from a painful chastisement?"
Say, "He is the Most Gracious: we believe in Him and we put our trust in Him. You will soon come to know who is in evident error."
Say, "Have you considered if your water were to sink  into the ground, who could then bring you flowing water?"
