Say, "It has been revealed to me that a band of the jinn listened [to the Quran] and they said, "We have heard a really wonderful recital,
which guides to the right path; so we have believed in it and we will not associate anyone with our Lord,
and exalted is the majesty of our Lord, He has taken neither a wife nor a son.
And [now we know] that the foolish among us have been saying outrageous things about God.
We had supposed that men and jinn would never utter a lie against God.
Some men used to seek refuge with the jinn in the past, but that only increased their insolence.
They thought, as you did, that God would never raise up anyone from the dead.
We sought to reach heaven, but found it filled with strong guards and flames --
we used to take up a position to listen, but whoever listens now finds a flaming fire lying in wait for him --
we cannot tell if this bodes evil to those who dwell on earth or whether their Lord intends to guide them.
Some of us are righteous, while others are not; we follow divergent paths.
We have realized that we could never thwart God on earth and that we would never be able to thwart Him by flight.
When we heard the call to guidance, we believed in it. He who believes in his Lord has no fear of loss or of injustice.
Some of us are obedient while others are wrongdoers; it is the obedient who have found the right path,
but those who are wrongdoers will become the fuel of Hell."
If they had followed the right path, We would have provided them with abundant rain --
so that We may test them by it -- whoever turns away from the remembrance of his Lord shall be sternly punished.
The mosques are for God's worship -- so do not invoke anyone else along with God --
when God's servant stood up to pray to Him, they pressed close to him in great numbers, almost stifling him.
Say, "I call only upon my Lord and do not associate anyone else with Him."
Say, "It is not in my power to cause you either harm or good?"
Say, "Surely no one can protect me against God, nor can I find besides Him any place of refuge.
My duty is only to convey that which I receive from Him and His messages." For those who disobey God and His Messenger there is the fire of hell, wherein they will abide forever.
When they are confronted by what they have been promised, they will realize who is weaker in helpers and fewer in numbers.
Say, "I do not know whether what you are promised is imminent, or whether my Lord has set for it a far-off day.
He alone has knowledge of what is hidden. He reveals this to none,
except the messenger whom He has chosen. He sends down guardians who walk before them and behind them,
so that He may know that the messengers have delivered the messages of their Lord. He encompasses all that is with them and He keeps count of all things.
