O, you, wrapped in your cloak,
arise and give warning!
Proclaim the glory of your Lord;
purify your garments;
shun uncleanness;
do not bestow a favour in the expectation of receiving more in return;
and for the sake of your Lord, be patient.
When the Trumpet is sounded,
that Day will be a hard and distressing Day.
It will not be easy for those who deny the truth.
Leave Me alone [to deal] with him whom I have created alone,
and to whom I have granted resources in abundance,
and sons to be by his side,
and whom I have provided with every resource,
and yet, he greedily desires that I give him even more!
By no means! He has been stubbornly hostile to Our revelation:
I shall force him to endure a painful uphill climb!
For he thought and he plotted --
and woe to him; how he plotted!
Let him be destroyed. How he calculated!
Then he looked round;
then he frowned and scowled,
and he turned his back and behaved arrogantly
and said, "This is nothing but sorcery from the ancients.
This is nothing but the word of a mortal!"
Soon I will cast him into hell.
What could make you conceive what hell-fire is?
It does not allow anyone to live, and neither does it leave anyone to die;
it scorches the skin;
there are nineteen [angels] in charge of it --
We have appointed only angels to be wardens of the Fire. We have specified their number only as a trial for those who are bent on denying the truth, so that those who were given the Book might gain in certainty, and those who believe might increase in faith -- and so that neither those who have been given the Scripture nor the believers might have any doubts, and that those sick at heart and those who deny the truth might ask, "What does God mean by this parable?" In this way, God lets go astray whom He wills, and guides whom He wills. And none knows the forces of your Lord but He. This is but a Reminder for man.
No, by the moon!
By the night when it departs.
By the dawn when it lightens!
Surely, it is one of the gravest things,
it is a warning to man,
alike to every one of you, who want to go forward or hang back.
Every soul is held in pledge against its own deeds,
except those of the right hand
who in their gardens will be enquiring
about the sinners.
"What has brought you into the Fire of Hell ?"
and they shall reply, "We were not among those who prayed;
and we did not feed the poor;
we indulged in vain arguments along with those who indulged in them;
and we denied the Day of Judgement
until the Inevitable End [death] overtook us."
So no intercession will avail them.
Then what is wrong with them that they turn away from admonition,
like frightened donkeys
fleeing from a lion?
Indeed, everyone of them desires to have sheets of revelations unfolded before them --
No! They do not fear the Hereafter --
but this is truly a reminder.
Let him who will take heed:
they will only take heed if God so wills: He is the Lord who is worthy to be feared: the Lord of forgiveness.
