Was there not a period of time when man was nothing worth mentioning?
We created man from a drop of mingled fluid so that We might try him; We gave him hearing and sight;
We showed him the way, whether he be grateful or ungrateful.
[Now,] behold, for those who deny the truth, We have prepared chains, iron collars and a blazing fire, but
the righteous shall drink from a cup mixed with the coolness of kafur,
a spring from which God's servants will drink, making it gush forth in branches.
They keep their vows and fear a day the woe of which will spread far and wide;
they give food, despite their love for it, to the poor and orphans and captives,
saying, "We feed you for the sake of God alone, we seek neither recompense nor thanks from you.
Truly, we fear from our Lord a woefully grim Day."
Therefore, God will ward off from them the woes of that Day, and make them find brightness and joy,
and their reward for being patient will be a Garden and silk [clothing].
Reclining upon couches, they will find therein neither the heat of the sun nor bitter, biting cold,
the shading branches of trees will come down low over them, and their clusters of fruit, will hang down where they are the easiest to reach.
Vessels of silver and goblets of pure crystal will be passed round among them
and gleaming silver goblets which have been filled to the exact measure,
and they will be given a cup to drink flavoured with ginger,
from a flowing spring called Salsabil.
They will be attended by youths who will not age -- when you see them you will think them to be like sprinkled pearls --
wherever you look, you will see bliss and a great kingdom:
they will wear green garments of fine silk and rich brocade. They will be adorned with silver bracelets. And their Lord will give them a pure drink.
This is your reward. Your endeavour is fully acknowledged.
Truly, it is We who have revealed to you the Quran, a gradual revelation.
So wait patiently for the command of your Lord, and do not yield to anyone among them who is sinful or ungrateful;
and glorify your Lord morning and evening;
and during the night prostrate ourself before Him, and extol His glory for a long part of the night.
Those people [who are unmindful of God] aspire for immediate gains, and put behind them a Heavy Day.
It was We who created them and made their constitution strong, but if We wish we can replace them with others like them.
This is a reminder. Let whoever wishes, take the right path to his Lord.
But you cannot will it unless God wills [to show you that way] -- God is indeed all-knowing and wise --
He admits whoever He will into His grace and has prepared a painful punishment for the evil doers.
