By the winds sent forth in swift succession,
and then storming on with a tempest's force,
and the rain-spreading winds,
separating one from another,
by those who bring down the reminder,
to excuse some and warn others:
that which you have been promised shall be fulfilled.
When the stars lose their light,
and when the sky is rent asunder,
and when the mountains crumble into dust
and when the messengers are brought together at the appointed time --
for what Day has this been appointed?
For the Day of Decision.
What will explain to you what the Day of Judgement is?
Woe on that Day to those who reject the truth.
Did We not destroy the earlier peoples?
We will now cause the later ones to follow them:
thus do We deal with the culprits.
Woe on that Day to those who reject the truth!
Did We not create you from a humble fluid,
then placed it in a secure repository [the womb],
for an appointed term?
Thus We have determined the stages of development and Our power to determine is excellent indeed.
Woe on that Day to those who reject the truth!
Have We not made the earth a receptacle,
for the living and the dead?
Have We not placed high mountains upon it and given you fresh water to drink?
Woe on that Day to those who reject the truth!
Proceed to that which you denied.
Proceed to a shadow rising in three columns:
affording neither shade, nor protection from the flames,
and throwing up sparks as huge as towers
and as bright as a herd of yellow camels.
Woe on that Day to those who reject the truth!
On that Day they will be speechless,
nor shall they be permitted to offer excuses.
Woe on that Day to those who reject the truth!
This is the Day of Judgement. We have assembled you all together with past generations.
If now you have any strategy, use it against Me.
Woe on that Day to those who reject the truth!
The righteous shall dwell amidst cool shades and fountains,
and shall have fruits such as they desire;
[They will be told], "Eat and drink with relish in return for what you did [in life]:
this is how We reward those who do good."
[But] woe on that Day to those who reject the truth!
Eat [your fill] and enjoy your life for a little while, O you who are lost in sin.
Woe on that Day to those who reject the truth!
When they are bidden to bow down, they do not bow down.
Woe on that Day to those who reject the truth!
In which word then, after this, will they believe?
