What are they asking each other about?
About the awesome tidings [of resurrection]
concerning which they are in disagreement!
But they will soon come to know.
Surely, they will soon find out the truth!
Have We not spread the earth like a bed,
and raised the mountains like supporting poles?
We created you in pairs,
and gave you repose in sleep,
and the night as a cover,
and made the day for earning a livelihood.
We have built above you seven mighty heavens,
and We have set therein a glowing lamp.
>From the rain clouds We send waters pouring down in abundance,
so that We may bring forth thereby grain and a variety of plants,
and gardens dense with foliage.
Surely, the Day of Judgement has an appointed time.
On that Day when the trumpet shall be sounded, you shall come in droves,
and the heaven shall be opened, and become gates,
and the mountains shall be made to vanish, as if they had been a mirage.
Surely, Hell lies in wait,
a home for the transgressors,
where they shall remain for ages,
and where they will taste neither coolness nor any drink
save boiling water and a stinking fluid --
a fitting requital,
for they never expected to be called to account,
and they rejected outright Our signs;
but We have recorded everything in a Book.
[So We shall say], "Taste, then, [the fruit of your evil doings,] for now We shall bestow on you nothing but more and more suffering!"
As for those who are mindful of God, they shall surely triumph:
theirs shall be gardens and vineyards,
and young maidens of equal age,
and overflowing cups.
There they shall not hear any idle talk, or any untruth:
all this will be a recompense, a gift, that will suffice them, from your Lord,
the Sustainer of the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them, the most Gracious [and] none shall have it in their power to raise their voices to Him.
On the Day when the Spirit and the angels stand in ranks, no one will speak, except for those to whom the Lord of Mercy gives permission, and who will say only what is right.
That Day is sure to come, so whoever wishes to, let him take the path that leads towards his Lord.
We have warned you of a chastisement which is near at hand, on the Day when man shall [clearly] see what his hands have sent ahead, and when he who has denied the truth shall say, "Oh, would that I were dust!"
