By [the winds] that pluck out vehemently
and those that blow gently,
and by [the clouds] that swim serenely and
by those that outstrip them suddenly,
and by those who regulate events.
On the Day when a violent convulsion will convulse [the world],
to be followed by further [convulsions],
hearts will be throbbing,
while eyes will be downcast.
They say, "What? shall we be brought back to life,
even after we have turned into decayed bones?"
and they say, "That indeed would be a losing return."
But all it will take is a single blast,
and behold! They will all come out in the open.
Have you heard the story of Moses?
His Lord called out to him by the sacred valley of Tuwa:
[saying], "Go to Pharaoh, he has exceeded all bounds,
and say, 'Will you reform yourself?
Do you want me to guide you to your Lord, so that you should fear Him?'"
Moses showed him the great sign,
but he denied it and refused [the faith].
Then he quickly turned his back.
And he summoned all his people,
and proclaimed, "I am your supreme Lord,"
but God seized him and meted out to him the chastisement of both the next world and the present:
surely there is in this a lesson for the God-fearing.
[O Men!] Are you more difficult to create than the heaven which He has built,
by raising its vault high and fashioning it flawlessly,
and making its night dark and bringing forth its morning light,
and the earth which He spread out,
after that bringing forth from it its water and its pasture land,
and making the mountains firm:
[all this] as a means of sustenance for you and your animals?
When the great over-whelming event arrives,
on the Day that man remembers what he strove for
and Hell is there for all to see,
anyone who has acted arrogantly
and prefers the life of this world,
will find himself in Hell;
but one who fears to stand before his Lord and restrained himself from base desires,
shall dwell in Paradise.
They will ask you [Prophet] about the Hour, saying, "When it will come to pass?",
what have you to do with the mentioning of it?
Your Lord alone knows when it will come;
you are but a warner for those who fear it.
On the Day when they see it, they will feel as if they had tarried in this world for only one evening or one morning.
