ALIF LAM MIM.
This is The Book free of doubt and involution, a guidance for those who preserve themselves from evil and follow the straight path,
Who believe in the Unknown and fulfil their devotional obligations, and spend in charity of what We have given them;
Who believe in what has been revealed to you and what was revealed to those before you, and are certain of the Hereafter.
They have found the guidance of their Lord and will be successful.
As for those who deny, it is all the same if you warn them or not, they will not believe.
God has sealed their hearts and ears, and veiled their eyes. For them is great deprivation.
And there are some who, though they say: "We believe in God and the Last Day," (in reality) do not believe.
They (try to) deceive God and those who believe, yet deceive none but themselves although they do not know.
Sick are their hearts, and God adds to their malady. For them is suffering for they lie.
When asked to desist from spreading corruption in the land they say: "Why, we are reformers."
Yet they are surely mischief-mongers, even though they do not know.
When asked to believe as others do, they say: "Should we believe like fools?" And yet they are the fools, even though they do not know.
When they meet the faithful they say: "We believe;" but when alone with the devils (their fellows), they say: "We are really with you; we were joking."
But God will turn the joke against them and allow them to sink deeper into evil and wander perplexed in their wickedness.
They are indeed those who bartered away good guidance for error and gained nothing from the deal, nor found the right way.
They are like a man who kindles a fire, and when its glow has illumined the air God takes away their light leaving them in the dark where they will not be able to see.
They are deaf, dumb and blind, and shall never return;
Or like rain pouring from the sky which hides within it darkness, thunder and lightning. They thrust their fingers into their ears for safety against noise and death. But God surrounds those who believe not from all sides.
Verily the lightning could snatch away their eyes. When it flashes forth they walk in its flare. When darkness returns they stand still. And if the Lord wills so He could take away their hearing and sight; surely God is all-powerful.
So, O you people, adore your Lord who created you, as He did those before you, that you could take heed for yourselves and fear Him
Who made the earth a bed for you, the sky a canopy, and sends forth rain from the skies that fruits may grow -- your food and sustenance. So, do not make another the equal of God knowingly.
If you are in doubt of what We have revealed to Our votary, then bring a Surah like this, and call any witness, apart from God, you like, if you are truthful.
But if you cannot, as indeed you cannot, then guard yourselves against the Fire whose fuel is men and rocks, which has been prepared for the infidels.
Announce to those who believe and have done good deeds, glad tidings of gardens under which rivers flow, and where, when they eat the fruits that grow, they will say: "Indeed they are the same as we were given before," so like in semblance the food would be. And they shall have fair spouses there, and live there abidingly.
God is not loath to advance the similitude of a gnat or a being more contemptible; and those who believe know whatever is from the Lord is true. But those who disbelieve say: "What does God mean by this parable?" He causes some to err this way, and some He guides; yet He turns away none but those who transgress,
Who, having sealed it, break God's covenant, dividing what He ordained cohered; and those who spread discord in the land will suffer assuredly.
Then how can you disbelieve in God? He gave you life when you were dead. He will make you die again then bring you back to life: To Him then you will return.
He made for you all that lies within the earth, then turning to the firmament He proportioned several skies: He has knowledge of everything.
Remember, when your Lord said to the angels: "I have to place a trustee on the earth," they said: "Will You place one there who would create disorder and shed blood, while we intone Your litanies and sanctify Your name?" And God said: "I know what you do not know."
Then He gave Adam knowledge of the nature and reality of all things and everything, and set them before the angels and said: "Tell Me the names of these if you are truthful."
And they said: "Glory to You (O Lord), knowledge we have none except what You have given us, for You are all-knowing and all-wise."
Then He said to Adam: "Convey to them their names." And when he had told them, God said: "Did I not tell you that I know the unknown of the heavens and the earth, and I know what you disclose and know what you hide?"
Remember, when We asked the angels to bow in homage to Adam, they all bowed but Iblis, who disdained and turned insolent, and so became a disbeliever.
And We said to Adam: "Both you and your spouse live in the Garden, eat freely to your fill wherever you like, but approach not this tree or you will become transgressors.
But Satan tempted them and had them banished from the (happy) state they were in. And We said: "Go, one the antagonist of the other, and live on the earth for a time ordained, and fend for yourselves."
Then his Lord sent commands to Adam and turned towards him: Indeed He is compassionate and kind.
And We said to them: "Go, all of you. When I send guidance, whoever follows it will neither have fear nor regret;
But those who deny and reject Our signs will belong to Hell, and there abide unchanged."
O children of Israel, remember the favours I bestowed on you. So keep your pledge to Me, and I will mine to you, and be fearful of Me,
And believe in what I have sent down which verifies what is already with you; and do not be the first to deny it, nor part with it for little gain; and beware of Me.
Do not confuse truth with falsehood, nor conceal the truth knowingly.
Be firm in devotion; give zakat (the due share of your wealth for the welfare of others), and bow with those who bow (before God).
Will you enjoin good deeds on the others and forget your own selves? You also read the Scriptures, why do you then not understand?
Find strength in fortitude and prayer, which is heavy and exacting but for those who are humble and meek,
Who are conscious that they have to meet their Lord, and to Him they have to return.
Remember, O children of Israel, the favours I bestowed on you, and made you exalted among the nations of the world.
Take heed of the day when no man will be useful to man in the least, when no intercession matter nor ransom avail, nor help reach them.
Remember, We saved you from the Pharaoh's people who wronged and oppressed you and slew your sons but spared your women: In this was a great favour from your Lord.
Remember, We parted the sea and saved you, and drowned the men of Pharaoh before your very eyes.
Yet, remember, as We communed with Moses for forty nights you took the calf in his absence (and worshipped it), and you did wrong.
Even so, We pardoned you that you may be grateful.
Remember, We gave Moses the Book and Discernment of falsehood and truth, that you may be guided.
Remember, Moses said: "My people, by taking this calf you have done yourselves harm, so now turn to your Creator in repentance, and kill your pride, which is better with your Lord." And (the Lord) softened towards you, for He is all-forgiving and merciful.
Remember, when you said to Moses: "We shall not believe in you until we see God face to face," lightning struck you as you looked.
Even then We revived you after you had become senseless that you might give thanks;
And made the cloud spread shade over you, and sent for you manna and quails that you may eat of the good things We have made for you. No harm was done to Us, they only harmed themselves.
And remember, We said to you: "Enter this city, eat wherever you like, as much as you please, but pass through the gates in humility and say: 'May our sins be forgiven.' We shall forgive your trespasses and give those who do good abundance.
But the wicked changed and perverted the word We had spoken to a word distorted, and We sent from heaven retribution on the wicked, for they disobeyed.
And remember, when Moses asked for water for his people, We told him to strike the rock with his staff, and behold, twelve springs of gushing water gushed forth so that each of the tribes came to know its place of drinking. Eat and drink, (enjoy) God's gifts, and spread no discord in the land.
Remember, when you said: "O Moses, we are tired of eating the same food (day after day), ask your Lord to give us fruits of the earth, herbs and cucumbers, grains and lentils and onions;" he said: "Would you rather exchange what is good with what is bad? Go then to the city, you shall have what you ask." So they were disgraced and became indigent, earning the anger of God, for they disbelieved the word of God, and slayed the prophets unjustly, for they transgressed and rebelled.
Surely the believers and the Jews, Nazareans and the Sabians, whoever believes in God and the Last Day, and whosoever does right, shall have his reward with his Lord and will neither have fear nor regret.
Remember the day We made the covenant with you and exalted you on the Mount and said: "Hold fast to what We have given you, and remember what is therein that you may take heed."
But you went back (on your word), and but for the mercy and grace of God you were lost.
You know and have known already those among you who had broken the sanctity of the Sabbath, and to whom We had said: "Become (like) apes despised,"
And whom We made an example for the people (of the day) and those after them, and warning for those who fear God.
Remember, when Moses said to his people: "God demands that you sacrifice a cow," they said: "Are you making fun of us?" And he said: "God forbid that I be of the ignorant."
"Call on your Lord for us," they said, "that He might inform us what kind she should be." "Neither old nor young, says God, but of age in between," answered Moses. "So do as you are bid."
"Call on your Lord," they said, "to tell us the colour of the cow." "God says," answered Moses, "a fawn coloured cow, rich yellow, well pleasing to the eye."
"Call on your Lord," they said, "to name its variety, as cows be all alike to us. If God wills we shall be guided aright."
And Moses said: "He says it's a cow unyoked, nor worn out by ploughing or watering the fields, one in good shape with no mark or blemish." "Now have you brought us the truth," they said; and then, after wavering, they sacrificed the cow.
Remember when you killed a man and blamed each other for the deed, God brought to light what you concealed.
We had pronounced already: "Slay (the murderer) for (taking a life)." Thus God preserves life from death and shows you His signs that you may understand.
Yet, in spite of this, your hearts only hardened like rocks or even harder, but among rocks are those from which rivers flow; and there are also those which split open and water gushes forth; as well as those that roll down for fear of God. And God is not negligent of all that you do.
How do you expect them to put their faith in you, when you know that some among them heard the word of God and, having understood, perverted it knowingly?
For when they meet the faithful, they say: "We believe;" but when among themselves, they say: "Why do you tell them what the Lord has revealed to you? They will only dispute it in the presence of your Lord. Have you no sense indeed?"
Do they not know that God is aware of what they hide and what they disclose?
Among them are heathens who know nothing of the Book but only what they wish to believe, and are only lost in fantasies.
But woe to them who fake the Scriptures and say: "This is from God," so that they might earn some profit thereby; and woe to them for what they fake, and woe to them for what they earn from it!
Yet they say: "The Fire will not touch us for more than a few days." Say.. "Have you so received a promise from God?" "Then surely God will not withdraw His pledge. Or do you impute things to God of which you have no knowledge at all?"
Why, they who have earned the wages of sin and are enclosed in error, are people of Hell, where they will abide for ever.
But those who believe and do good deeds are people of Paradise, and shall live there forever.
Remember, when We made a covenant with the people of Israel and said: "Worship no one but God, and be good to your parents and your kin, and to orphans and the needy, and speak of goodness to men; observe your devotional obligations, and give zakat (the due share of your wealth for the welfare of others)," you went back (on your word), except only a few, and paid no heed.
And remember, when We made a covenant with you whereby you agreed you will neither shed blood among you nor turn your people out of their homes, you promised, and are witness to it too.
But you still kill one another, and you turn a section of your people from their homes, assisting one another against them with guilt and oppression. Yet when they are brought to you as captives you ransom them, although forbidden it was to drive them away. Do you, then, believe a part of the Book and reject a part? There is no other award for them who so act but disgrace in the world, and on the Day of Judgement the severest of punishment; for God is not heedless of all that you do.
They are those who bought the life of the world at the cost of the life to come; and neither will their torment decrease nor help reach them.
Remember We gave Moses the Book and sent after him many an apostle; and to Jesus, son of Mary, We gave clear evidence of the truth, reinforcing him with divine grace. Even so, when a messenger brought to you what did not suit your mood you turned haughty, and called some imposters and some others you slew.
And they say: "Our hearts are enfolded in covers." In fact God has cursed them for their unbelief; and only a little do they believe.
And when the Book was sent to them by God verifying what had been revealed to them already even though before it they used to pray for victory over the unbelievers and even though they recognised it when it came to them, they renounced it. The curse of God be on those who deny!
They bartered their lives ill denying the revelation of God out of spite that God should bestow His grace among His votaries on whomsoever He will, and thus earned wrath upon wrath. The punishment for disbelievers is ignominious.
And when it is said to them: "believe in what God has sent down," they say: "We believe what was sent to us, and do not believe what has come thereafter," although it affirms the truth they possess already. Say: "Why have you then been slaying God's apostles as of old, if you do believe?"
Although Moses had come to you with evidence of the truth, you chose the calf in his absence, and you transgressed.
Remember when We took your pledge and exalted you on the Mount (saying:) "Hold fast to what We have given you, firmly, and pay heed," you said: "We have heard and will not obey." (The image of) the calf had sunk deep into their hearts on account of unbelief. Say: "Vile is your belief if you are believers indeed!"
Tell them: "If you think you alone will abide with God to the exclusion of the rest of Mankind, in the mansions of the world to come, then wish for death if what you say is true."
But they will surely not wish for death because of what they had done in the past; and God knows the sinners well.
You will see they are covetous of life more than other men, even more than those who practise idolatry. Each one of them desires to live a thousand years, although longevity will never save them from punishment, for God sees all they do.
Say: "Whosoever is the enemy of Gabriel who revealed the word of God to you by the dispensation of God, reaffirming what had been revealed before, and is a guidance and good news for those who believe, --
Whosoever is the enemy of God and His angels and apostles, and of Gabriel and Michael, then God is the enemy of such unbelievers."
We have sent clear signs to you, such as none can deny except those who transgress the truth.
And every time they made a pledge some of them pushed it aside, and many of them do not believe.
When a messenger was sent to them by God affirming the Books they had already received, some of them put (His message) behind their backs as if they had no knowledge of it.
And they follow what devilish beings used to chant against the authority of Solomon, though Solomon never disbelieved and only the devils denied, who taught sorcery to men, which, they said, had been revealed to the angels of Babylon, Harut and Marut, who, however, never taught it without saying: "We have been sent to deceive you, so do not renounce (your faith)." They learnt what led to discord between husband and wife. Yet they could not harm any one or without the dispensation of God. And they learnt what harmed them and brought no gain. They knew indeed whoever bought this had no place in the world to come, and that surely they had sold themselves for something that was vile. If only they had sense!
Had they come to believe instead, and taken heed for themselves, they would surely have earned from God a far better reward. If only they had sense!
Say not (to the Prophet), O Believers: "Have regard for us (ra'ina)," but "look at us (unzurna)," and obey him in what he says. Painful is the nemesis for disbelievers.
Those without faith among the people of the Book, and those who worship idols, do not wish that good should come to you from your Lord. But God chooses whom He likes for His grace; and the bounty of God is infinite.
When We cancel a message (sent to an earlier prophet) or throw it into oblivion, We replace it with one better or one similar. Do you not know that God has power over all things?
Do you not know that God's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and that there is none to save and protect you apart from God?
Do you too, O believers, wish to question your Apostle as Moses was in the past? But he who takes unbelief in exchange for belief only strays from the right path.
How many of the followers of the Books having once known the truth desire in their hearts, out of envy, to turn you into infidels again even after the truth has become clear to them! But you forbear and overlook till God fulfil His plan; and God has power over all things.
Fulfil your devotional obligations and pay the zakat. And what you send ahead of good you will find with God, for He sees all that you do ill.
And they say: "None will go to Paradise but the Jews and the Christians;" but this is only wishful thinking. Say: "Bring the proof if you are truthful."
Only he who surrenders to God with all his heart and also does good, will find his reward with his Lord, and will have no fear or regret.
The Jews say: "The Christians are not right," and the Christians say: "The Jews are in the wrong;" yet both read the Scriptures; and this is what the unread had said too. God alone will judge between them in their differences on the Day of Reckoning.
And who is more unjust than he who prohibits the name of God being used in His mosques, who hurries to despoil them even though he has no right to enter them except in reverence? For them is ignominy in the world and severe punishment in the life to come.
To God belong the East and the West. Wherever you turn the glory of God is everywhere: All-pervading is He and all-knowing.
Yet they say that God has begotten a son. May He be praised! Indeed everything in the heavens and the earth belongs to Him, and all are obedient to God.
Creator of the heavens and the earth from nothingness, He has only to say when He wills a thing: "Be", and it is.
But those who are ignorant say: "Why does God not speak or show us a sign?" The same question had been asked by men before them, who were like them in their hearts. But to those who are firm in their faith We have shown Our signs already.
And We have sent you with the truth to give glad tidings and to warn. You will not be questioned about those and who are inmates of Hell.
The Jews and Christians will never be pleased with you until you follow their way. Say: "God's guidance alone is true guidance;" for if you give in to their wishes after having received the (Book of) knowledge from God, then none will you have as friend or helper to save you.
Those to whom We have sent down the Book, and who read it as it should be read, believe in it truly; but those who deny it will be losers.
O children of Israel, remember the favours I bestowed on you, and made you exalted among the nations of the world.
Fear the day when no man will stand up for man in the least, and no ransom avail nor intercession matter nor help reach.
Remember, when his Lord tried Abraham by a number of commands which he fulfilled, God said to him: "I will make you a leader among men." And when Abraham asked: "From my progeny too?" the Lord said: "My pledge does not include transgressors."
Remember, We made the House (of Ka'bah) a place of congregation and safe retreat, and said: "Make the spot where Abraham stood the place of worship;" and enjoined upon Abraham and Ishmael to keep Our House immaculate for those who shall walk around it and stay in it for contemplation and prayer, and for bowing in adoration.
And when Abraham said: "O Lord, make this a city of peace, and give those of its citizens who believe in God and the Last Day fruits for food," He answered: "To those will I also give a little who believe not, for a time, then drag them to Hell, a dreadful destination!"
And when Abraham was raising the plinth of the House with Ishmael, (he prayed): "Accept this from us, O Lord, for You hear and know everything;
And make us submit, O Lord, to Your will, and our progeny a people submissive to You. Teach us the way of worship and forgive our trespasses, for You are compassionate and merciful;
And send to them, O Lord, an apostle from among them to impart Your messages to them, and teach them the Book and the wisdom, and correct them in every way; for indeed You are mighty and wise.
Who will turn away from the creed of Abraham but one dull of soul? We made him the chosen one here in the world, and one of the best in the world to come,
(For) when his Lord said to him: "Obey," he replied: "I submit to the Lord of all the worlds."
And Abraham left this legacy to his sons, and to Jacob, and said: "O my sons, God has chosen this as the faith for you. Do not die but as those who have submitted (to God)."
Were you present at the hour of Jacob's death? "What will you worship after me?" he asked his sons, and they answered: "We shall worship your God and the God of your fathers, of Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac, the one and only God; and to Him we submit."
Those were the people, and they have passed away. Theirs the reward for what they did, as yours will be for what you do. You will not be questioned about their deeds.
They say: "Become Jews or become Christians, and find the right way." Say: "No. We follow the way of Abraham the upright, who was not an idolater."
Say: "We believe in God and what has been sent down to us, and what had been revealed to Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac and Jacob and their progeny, and that which was given to Moses and Christ, and to all other prophets by the Lord. We make no distinction among them, and we submit to Him."
If they come to believe as you did, they will find the right path. If they turn away then they will only oppose; but God will suffice you against them, for God hears all and knows everything.
"We have taken the colouring of God; and whose shade is better than God's? Him alone we worship."
Say: "Why do you dispute with us about God when He is equally your Lord and our Lord? To us belong our actions, to you yours; and we are true to Him."
Or do you claim that Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac and Jacob and their offspring were Jews or Christians? Say: "Have you more knowledge than God?" Who is more wicked than he who conceals the testimony he received from God? God is not unaware of all you do.
They were the people, and they have passed away. Theirs the reward for what they did, as yours will be for what you do. You will not be questioned about their deeds.
The foolish will now ask and say: "What has made the faithful turn away from the Qiblah towards which they used to pray?" Say: "To God belong the East and the West. He guides who so wills to the path that is straight."
We have made you a temperate people that you act as witness over man, and the Prophet as witness over you. We decreed the Qiblah which you faced before that We may know who follow the Apostle and who turn away in haste. And this was a hard (test) except for those who were guided by God. But God will not suffer your faith to go waste, for God is to men full of mercy and grace.
We have seen you turn your face to the heavens. We shall turn you to a Qiblah that will please you. So turn towards the Holy Mosque, and turn towards it wherever you be. And those who are recipients of the Book surely know that this is the truth from their Lord; and God is not negligent of all that you do.
Even though you bring all the proof to the people of the Book they will not face the direction you turn to, nor you theirs, nor will they follow each other's direction. And if you follow their whims after all the knowledge that has reached you, then surely you will be among transgressors.
Those to whom We have sent down the Book know this even as they know their sons. Yet a section among them conceals the truth knowingly.
The truth is from your Lord, so be not among those who are sceptics.
Each has a goal to which he turns. So strive towards piety and excel the others: God will bring you all together wheresoever you be. God has power over everything.
Wherever you come from turn towards the Holy Mosque: This in truth is from your Lord. God is not negligent of all you do.
Whichever place you come from turn towards the Holy Mosque, and wherever you are, turn your faces towards it so that people may have no cause for argument against you, except such among them as are wicked. But do not fear them, fear Me that I may accomplish My favours on you, and you may find the right way perchance.
Even as We sent a messenger from among you to convey Our messages to you and cleanse you, and teach you the Book and the wisdom, and what you did not know;
So, therefore, remember Me, and I shall remember you; and give thanks and do not be ungrateful.
O you who believe, seek courage in fortitude and prayer, for God is with those who are patient and persevere.
Do not say that those who are killed in the way of God, are dead, for indeed they are alive, even though you are not aware.
Be sure We shall try you with something of fear and hunger and loss of wealth and life and the fruits (of your labour); but give tidings of happiness to those who have patience,
Who say when assailed by adversity: "Surely we are for God, and to Him we shall return."
On such men are the blessings of God and His mercy, for they are indeed on the right path.
Truly Safa and Marwa are the symbols of God. Whoever goes on pilgrimage to the House (of God), or on a holy visit, is not guilty of wrong if he walk around them; and he who does good of his own accord will find appreciation with God who knows everything.
They who conceal Our signs and the guidance We have sent them and have made clear in the Book, are condemned of God and are condemned by those who are worthy of condemning.
But those who repent and reform and proclaim (the truth), are forgiven, for I am forgiving and merciful.
But those who deny, and die disbelieving, bear the condemnation of God and the angels and that of all men,
Under which they will live, and their suffering will neither decrease nor be respite for them.
Your God is one God; there is no god other than He, the compassionate, ever-merciful.
Creation of the heavens and the earth, alternation of night and day, and sailing of ships across the ocean with what is useful to man, and the rain that God sends from the sky enlivening the earth that was dead, and the scattering of beasts of all kinds upon it, and the changing of the winds, and the clouds which remain obedient between earth and sky, are surely signs for the wise.
And yet there are men who take others as compeers of God, and bestow on them love due to God; but the love of the faithful for God is more intense. If only the wicked could see now the agony that they will behold (on the Day of Resurrection), they will know that to God belongs the power entirely'. And the punishment of God is severe.
When those who were followed will disclaim those who followed them, and see the torment all ties between them shall be severed,
And the followers will say: "Could we live but once again we would leave them as they have abandoned us now." God will show them thus their deeds, and fill them with remorse; but never shall they find release from the Fire.
O men, eat only the things of the earth that are lawful and good. Do not walk in the footsteps of Satan, your acknowledged enemy.
He will ask you to indulge in evil, indecency, and to speak lies of God you cannot even conceive.
When it is said to them: "Follow what God has revealed," they reply: "No, we shall follow only what our fathers had practiced," -- even though their fathers had no wisdom or guidance!
The semblance of the infidels is that of a man who shouts to one that cannot hear more than a call and a cry. They are deaf, dumb and blind, and they fail to understand.
O believers, eat what is good of the food We have given you, and be grateful to God, if indeed you are obedient to Him.
Forbidden to you are carrion and blood, and the flesh of the swine, and that which has been consecrated (or killed) in the name of any other than God. If one is obliged by necessity to eat it without intending to transgress, or reverting to it, he is not guilty of sin; for God is forgiving and kind.
Those who conceal any part of the Scriptures that God has revealed, and thus make a little profit thereby, take nothing but fire as food; and God will not turn to them on the Day of Resurrection, nor nourish them for growth; and their doom will be painful.
They are those who bartered away good guidance for error, and pardon for punishment: How great is their striving for the Fire
That is because God has revealed the Book containing the truth; but those who are at variance about it have gone astray in their contrariness.
Piety does not lie in turning your face to East or West: Piety lies in believing in God, the Last Day and the angels, the Scriptures and the prophets, and disbursing your wealth out of love for God among your kin and the orphans, the wayfarers and mendicants, freeing the slaves, observing your devotional obligations, and in paying the zakat and fulfilling a pledge you have given, and being patient in hardship, adversity, and times of peril. These are the men who affirm the truth, and they are those who follow the straight path.
O believers, ordained for you is retribution for the murdered, (whether) a free man (is guilty) of (the murder of) a free man, or a slave of a slave, or a woman of a woman. But he who is pardoned some of it by his brother should be dealt with equity, and recompense (for blood) paid with a grace. This is a concession from your Lord and a kindness. He who transgresses in spite of it shall suffer painful punishment.
In retribution there is life (and preservation). O men of sense, you may haply take heed for yourselves.
It is ordained that when any one of you nears death, and he owns goods and chattels, he should bequeath them equitably to his parents and next of kin. This is binding on those who are upright and fear God.
And any one who changes the will, having heard it, shall be guilty and accountable; for God hears all and knows everything.
He who suspects wrong or partiality on the part of the testator and brings about a settlement, does not incure any guilt, for God is verily forgiving and merciful.
O believers, fasting is enjoined on you as it was on those before you, so that you might become righteous.
Fast a (fixed) number of days, but if someone is ill or is travelling (he should complete) the number of days (he had missed); and those who find it hard to fast should expiate by feeding a poor person. For the good they do with a little hardship is better for men. And if you fast it is good for you, if you knew.
Ramadan is the month in which the Qur'an was revealed as guidance to man and clear proof of the guidance, and criterion (of falsehood and truth). So when you see the new moon you should fast the whole month; but a person who is ill or travelling (and fails to do so) should fast on other days, as God wishes ease and not hardship for you, so that you complete the (fixed) number (of fasts), and give glory to God for the guidance, and be grateful.
When My devotees enquire of you about Me, I am near, and answer the call of every supplicant when he calls. It behoves them to hearken to Me and believe in Me that they may follow the right path.
You are allowed to sleep with your wives on the nights of the fast: They are your dress as you are theirs. God is aware you were cheating yourselves, so He turned to you and pardoned you. So now you may have intercourse with them, and seek what God has ordained for you. Eat and drink until the white thread of dawn appears clear from the dark line, then fast until the night falls; and abstain from your wives (when you have decided) to stay in the mosques for assiduous devotion. These are the bounds fixed by God, so keep well within them. So does God make His signs clear to men that they may take heed for themselves.
And do not consume each other's wealth in vain, nor offer it to men in authority with intent of usurping unlawfully and knowingly a part of the wealth of others.
They ask you of the new moons. Say: "These are periods set for men (to reckon) time, and for pilgrimage." Piety does not lie in entering the house through the back door, for the pious man is he who follows the straight path. Enter the house through the main gate, and obey God. You may haply find success.
Fight those in the way of God who fight you, but do not be aggressive: God does not like aggressors.
And fight those (who fight you) wheresoever you find them, and expel them from the place they had turned you out from. Oppression is worse than killing. Do not fight them by the Holy Mosque unless they fight you there. If they do, then slay them: Such is the requital for unbelievers.
But if they desist, God is forgiving and kind.
Fight them till sedition comes to end, and the law of God (prevails). If they desist, then cease to be hostile, except against those who oppress.
(Fighting during) the holy month (if the sanctity) of the holy month (is violated) is (just) retribution. So if you are oppressed, oppress those who oppress you to the same degree, and fear God, and know that God is with those who are pious and follow the right path.
Spend in the way of God, and do not seek destruction at your own hands. So do good for God loves those who do good.
Perform the pilgrimage and holy visit ('Umra, to Makkah) in the service of God. But if you are prevented, send an offering which you can afford as sacrifice, and do not shave your heads until the offering has reached the place of sacrifice. But if you are sick or have ailment of the scalp (preventing the shaving of hair), then offer expiation by fasting or else giving alms or a sacrificial offering. When you have security, then those of you who wish to perform the holy visit along with the pilgrimage, should make a sacrifice according to their means. But he who has nothing, should fast for three days during the pilgrimage and seven on return, completing ten. This applies to him whose family does not live near the Holy Mosque. Have fear of God, and remember that God is severe in punishment.
Known are the months of pilgrimage. If one resolves to perform the pilgrimage in these months, let him not indulge in concupiscence, sin or quarrel. And the good you do shall be known to God. Provide for the journey, and the best of provisions is piety. O men of understanding, obey Me.
It is no sin to seek the favours of your Lord (by trading). When you start from 'Arafat in a concourse, remember God at the monument that is sacred (al-Mash'ar al-haram), and remember Him as He has shown you the way, for in the olden days you we're a people astray.
Then move with the crowd impetuously, and pray God to forgive you your sins. God is surely forgiving and kind.
When you have finished the rites and ceremonies, remember God as you do your fathers, in fact with a greater devotion. There are some who say: "Give us, O Lord, in the world;" but they will forego their share in the life to come.
But some there are who pray: "Give us of good in the world, O Lord, and give us of good in the life to come, and suffer us not to suffer the torment of Hell."
They are those who will surely have their share of whatsoever they have earned; for God is swift at the reckoning.
Remember God during the stated days; but if a person comes away after two days, it will not be a sin; and if one tarries, he will not transgress, if he keep away from evil. Follow the law of God, and remember that you will have to gather before Him in the end.
There is a man who talks well of the world to your pleasing, and makes God witness to what is in his heart, yet he is the most contentious;
For when his back is turned he goes about spreading disorder in the land, destroying fields and flocks; but God does not love disorder.
Whenever he is told: "Obey God," his arrogance leads him to more sin; and sufficient for him shall be Hell: How evil a place of wide expanse!
And there is a man who is willing to sell even his soul to win the favour of God; and God is compassionate to His creatures.
O believers, come to full submission to God. Do not follow in the footsteps of Satan your acknowledged foe.
If you falter even after Our signs have reached you, then do not forget that God is all-powerful and all-wise.
Are they waiting for God to appear in the balconies of clouds with a host of angels, and the matter to be settled? But all things rest with God in the end.
Ask the children of Israel how many a clear sign We had given them. But if one changes the favour of God after having received it, then remember, God is severe in revenge.
Enamoured are the unbelievers of the life of this world, and scoff at the faithful. But those who keep from evil and follow the straight path will have a higher place than they on the Day of Reckoning; for God gives in measure without number whomsoever He will.
Men belonged to a single community, and God sent them messengers to give them happy tidings and warnings, and sent the Book with them containing the truth to judge between them in matters of dispute; but only those who received it differed after receiving clear proofs, on account of waywardness (and jealousies) among them. Then God by His dispensation showed those who believed the way to the truth about which they were differing; for God shows whom He please the path that is straight.
Do you think you will find your way to Paradise even though you have not known what the others before you have gone through? They had suffered affliction and loss, and were shaken and tossed about so that even the Apostle had to cry out with his followers: "When will the help of God arrive?" Remember, the help of God is ever at hand.
They ask you of what they should give in charity. Tell them: "What you can spare of your wealth as should benefit the parents, the relatives, the orphans, the needy, the wayfarers, for God is not unaware of the good deeds that you do."
Enjoined on you is fighting, and this you abhor. You may dislike a thing yet it may be good for you; or a thing may haply please you but may be bad for you. Only God has knowledge, and you do not know.
They ask you of war in the holy month. Tell them: "To fight in that month is a great sin. But a greater sin in the eyes of God is to hinder people from the way of God, and not to believe in Him, and to bar access to the Holy Mosque and turn people out of its precincts; and oppression is worse than killing. They will always seek war against you till they turn you away from your faith, if they can. But those of you who turn back on their faith and die disbelieving will have wasted their deeds in this world and the next. They are inmates of Hell, and shall there abide for ever.
Surely those who believe, and those who leave their homes and fight in the way of God, may hope for His benevolence, for God is forgiving and kind.
They ask you of (intoxicants,) wine and gambling. Tell them: "There is great enervation though profit in them for men; but their enervation is greater than benefit. And they ask you what they should give. Tell them: "The utmost you can spare." So does God reveal His signs: You may haply reflect
On this world and the next. And they ask you about the orphans. Tell them: "Improving their lot is much better; and if you take interest in their affairs, they are your brethren; and God is aware who are corrupt and who are honest; and if He had pleased He could surely have imposed on you hardship, for God is all-powerful and all-wise.
Do not marry idolatrous women unless they join the faith. A maid servant who is a believer is better than an idolatress even though you may like her. And do not marry your daughters to idolaters until they accept the faith. A servant who is a believer is better than an idolater even though you may like him. They invite you to Hell, but God calls you to Paradise and pardon by His grace. And He makes His signs manifest that men may haply take heed.
They ask you about menstruation. Tell them: "This is a period of stress. So keep away from women in this state till they are relieved of it. When they are free of it, you may go to them as God has enjoined. For God loves those who seek pardon, and those who are clean."
Women are like fields for you; so seed them as you intend, but plan the future in advance. And fear God, and remember, you have to face Him in the end. So convey glad tidings to those who believe.
Do not implicate God in your oaths to avoid doing good and being pious and keeping peace among men, for God hears all and knows everything.
God will not call you to account for that which is senseless in your oaths, but only for what is in your hearts; for God is forgiving and forbearing.
Those who swear to keep away from their wives (with intent of divorcing them) have four months of grace; then if they reconcile (during this period), surely God is forgiving and kind.
And if they are bent on divorce, God hears all and knows everything.
Women who are divorced have to wait for three monthly periods, and if they believe in God and the Last Day they must not hide unlawfully what God has formed within their wombs. Their husbands would do well to take them back in that case, if they wish to be reconciled. Women also have recognised rights as men have, though men have an edge over them. But God is all-mighty and all-wise.
Divorce is (revokable) two times (after pronouncement), after which (there are two ways open for husbands), either (to) keep (the wives) honourably, or part with them in a decent way. You are not allowed to take away the least of what you have given your wives, unless both of you fear that you would not be able to keep within the limits set by God. If you fear you cannot maintain the bounds fixed by God, there will be no blame on either if the woman redeems herself. Do not exceed the limits of God, for those who exceed the bounds set by God are transgressors.
If a man divorces her again (a third time), she becomes unlawful for him (and he cannot remarry her) until she has married another man. Then if he divorces her there is no harm if the two unite again if they think they will keep within the bounds set by God and made clear for those who understand.
When you have divorced your wives, and they have reached the end of the period of waiting, then keep them honourably (by revoking the divorce), or let them go with honour, and do not detain them with the intent of harassing lest you should transgress. He who does so will wrong himself. Do not mock the decrees of God, and remember the favours God has bestowed on you, and revealed to you the Book and the Law to warn you of the consequences of doing wrong. Have fear of God, and remember, God is cognisant of everything.
When you have divorced your wives and they have completed the fixed term (of waiting), do not stop them from marrying other men if it is agreed between them honourably. This warning is for those among you who believe in God and the Last Day. This is both proper and right for you, for God knows and you do not know.
The mothers should suckle their babies for a period of two years for those (fathers) who wish that they should complete the suckling, in which case they should feed them and clothe them in a befitting way; but no soul should be compelled beyond capacity, neither the mother made to suffer for the child nor the father for his offspring. The same holds good for the heir of the father (if he dies). If they wish to wean the child by mutual consent there is no harm. And if you wish to engage a wet nurse you may do so if you pay her an agreed amount as is customary. But fear God, and remember that God sees all that you do.
Wives of men who die among you should wait (after their husbands death) for four months and ten days; and when the term is over there is no sin if they do what they like with themselves honourably, for God is aware of all that you do.
There is no harm in proposing in secret to (any of) these women, or keeping the intention to yourself: God is aware that you will keep them in mind. Yet do not make a promise in secret, unless you speak in a manner that is proper; and do not resolve upon marriage till the fixed term of waiting is over. Remember that God knows what is in your hearts; so be fearful of Him, and remember that God is forgiving and forbearing.
There is no sin in divorcing your wives before the consummation of marriage or settling the dowry; but then provide adequately for them, the affluent according to their means, the poor in accordance with theirs as is befitting. This is surely the duty of those who do good.
And if you divorce them before the consummation of marriage, but after settling the dowry, then half the settled dowry must be paid, unless the woman forgoes it, or the person who holds the bond of marriage pays the full amount. And if the man pays the whole, it is nearer to piety. But do not forget to be good to each other, and remember that God sees all that you do.
Be wakeful of your service of prayer, and the midmost service; and honour God by standing before Him in devotion.
If you fear (war or danger), pray while standing or on horseback; but when you have safety again remember God, for He taught you what you did not know.
Those among you about to die leaving wives behind, should bequeath a year's maintenance and lodging for them, without expelling them from home. But if they leave (of their own accord), you will not be blamed for what they do with themselves in their own rights. God is all-mighty and all-wise.
Making a fair provision for women who are divorced is the duty of those who are God-fearing and pious.
So does God pronounce His decrees that you may understand.
Have you never thought of men who went out of their homes as a measure of safety against death, and they were thousands, to whom God said: "Die," then restored them to life? Indeed God bestows His blessings on men; only most men are not grateful.
Fight in the way of God, and remember that God hears all and knows everything.
Who will give a goodly loan to God which He might double many times? For God withholds and enlarges, and to Him you will return.
Have you thought of the elders of Israel after Moses, and how they said to their apostle: "Set up a king for us, then we shall fight in the way of God?" He replied: "This too is possible that when commanded to fight you may not fight at all." They said: "How is it we should not fight in the way of God when we have been driven from our homes and deprived of our Sons?" But when they were ordered to fight they turned away, except for a few; yet God knows the sinners.
And when their prophet said to them: "God has raised Saul king over you," they said: "How can he be king over us when we have greater right to kingship than he, for he does not even possess abundant wealth?" "God has chosen him in preference to you," said the prophet "and given him much more wisdom and prowess; and God gives authority to whomsoever He will: God is infinite and all-wise."
Their prophet said to them: "The sign of his kingship will be that you will come to have a heart full of peace and tranquility from your Lord and the legacy left by Moses' and Aaron's family supported by angels. This shall be a token for you if you really believe."
When Saul led his armies, he said: "God will test you by a stream. Whoever drinks its water will not be of me; but those who do not drink shall be on my side. The only exception will be those who scoop up a palmful of water with their hands." And but for a few they all drank of its water. When they had crossed it, and those who believed with him, they said: "We have no strength to combat Goliath and his forces today. But those who believed they have to face their Lord, said: "Many a time has a small band defeated a large horde by the will of God. God is with those who are patient (and persevere)."
And when they were facing Goliath and his hordes they prayed: "O Lord, give us endurance and steady our steps, and help us against the deniers of truth."
By the will of God they defeated them, and David killed Goliath, and God gave him kingship and wisdom, and taught him whatsoever He pleased. If God did not make men deter one another this earth would indeed be depraved. But gracious is God to the people of the world.
These are the messages of God. We recite them to you in all truth, as indeed you are one of the apostles.
Of all these apostles We have favoured some over the others. God has addressed some of them, and the stations of some have been exalted over the others. And to Jesus, son of Mary, We gave tokens, and reinforced him with divine grace. If God had so willed those who came after them would never have contended when clear signs had come to them. But dissensions arose, some believed, some denied. And if God had willed they would never have fought among themselves. But God does whatsoever He please.
O believers, expend of what We have given you before the day arrives on which there will be no barter, and no friendship or intercession matter, and those who are disbelievers will be sinners.
God: There is no god but He, the living, eternal, self-subsisting, ever sustaining. Neither does somnolence affect Him nor sleep. To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth: and who can intercede with Him except by His leave? Known to Him is all that is present before men and what is hidden (in time past and time future), and not even a little of His knowledge can they grasp except what He will. His seat extends over heavens and the earth, and He tires not protecting them: He alone is all high and supreme.
There is no compulsion in matter of faith. Distinct is the way of guidance now from error. He who turns away from the forces of evil and believes in God, will surely hold fast to a handle that is strong and unbreakable, for God hears all and knows everything.
God is the friend of those who believe, and leads them out of darkness into light; but the patrons of infidels are idols and devils who lead them from light into darkness. They are the residents of Hell, and will there for ever abide.
Have you thought of the man who argued with Abraham about his Lord because God had given him a kingdom? When Abraham said: "My Lord is the giver of life and death," he replied: "I am the giver of life and death." And Abraham said: "God makes the sun rise from the East; so you make it rise from the West," and dumbfounded was the infidel. God does not guide those who are unjust.
Or take the man who passed by a town which lay destroyed upside down. He said: "How can God restore this city now that it is destroyed?" So God made him die for a hundred years, then brought him back to life, and inquired: "How long did you stay in this state?" "A day or less than a day," he replied. "No," He said, "you were dead a hundred years, yet look at your victuals, they have not decomposed; and look at your ass! We shall make you a warning for men. And regard the bones, how We raise them and clothe them with flesh." When this became clear to him, the man said: "Indeed God has power over all things."
Remember, when Abraham said: "O Lord, show me how you raise the dead," He said: "What! Do you not believe?" "I do," answered Abraham. "I only ask for my heart's assurance." (The Lord) said: "Trap four birds and tame them, then put each of them on a (separate) hill, and call them, and they will come flying to you. Know that God is all-powerful and all-wise."
The semblance of those who expend their wealth in the way of God is that of a grain of corn from which grow seven ears, each ear containing a hundred grains. Truly God increases for whomsoever He will, for God is infinite and all-wise.
Those who spend in the way of God, and having spent do not boast or give pain (by word or deed), will get their reward from their Lord, and will neither have fear nor regret.
Saying a word that is kind, and forgiving is better than charity that hurts. (Do not forget that) God is affluent and kind.
O believers, do not nullify your charity by giving to oblige and flaunting (your favours) like a man who spends of his wealth only to show off, but does not believe in God and the Last Day. His semblance is that of a rock covered with earth which is washed away by rain exposing the hard rock bare. So they gain nothing from their earnings. God does not guide a people who do not believe.
But the semblance of those who expend their wealth to please God with firm and resolute hearts, is like a garden on a height on which the rain falls and it yields its fruits twice as much; and even if the rain does not fall the dew will suffice. For God sees all that you do.
Does any of you wish to have an orchard full of date-palm trees and vines, and streams of running water and fruits of all kinds, and then old age should overtake him while his children are small, and a scorching whirlwind should smite and burn it down? Thus God makes His signs clear to you that you may reflect.
O believers, give in charity what is good of the things you have earned, and of what you produce from the earth; and do not choose to give what is bad as alms, that is, things you would not like to accept yourself except with some condescension. Remember that God is affluent and praiseworthy.
Satan threatens you with want, and orders you (to commit) shameful acts. But God promises His pardon and grace, for God is bounteous and all-knowing.
He gives wisdom to whomsoever He please; and those who are bestowed wisdom get good in abundance. Yet none remembers this save men of wisdom.
Whatsoever you give away in alms or vow as offering, is all known to God; but the wicked will have none to help them.
If you give alms openly, it is well; but if you do it secretly and give to the poor, that is better. This will absolve you of some of your sins; and God is cognisant of all you do.
It is not for you to guide them: God guides whom He will. Whatever you spend you will do so for yourself, for you will do so to seek the way that leads to God; and what you spend in charity you will get back in full, and no wrong will be done to you.
(Give to) the needy who are engaged in the service of God who are not able to move about in the land, whom the ignorant consider to be affluent as they refrain from asking. You can know them from their faces for they do not ask of men importunately. God is surely cognisant of good things that you spend.
Those who spend of their wealth in the way of God, day and night, in secret or openly, have their reward with their Lord, and have nothing to fear or regret.
Those who live on usury will not rise (on Doomsday) but like a man possessed of the devil and demented. This because they say that trading is like usury. But trade has been sanctioned and usury forbidden by God. Those who are warned by their Lord and desist will keep (what they have taken of interest) already, and the matter will rest with God. But those who revert to it again are the residents of Hell where they will abide for ever.
God takes away (gain) from usury, but adds (profit) to charity; and God does not love the ungrateful and sinners.
Those who believe and do good deeds, and fulfil their devotional obligations and pay the zakat, have their reward with their Lord, and will have neither fear nor regret.
O believers, fear God and forego the interest that is owing, if you really believe.
If you do not, beware of war on the part of God and His Apostle. But if you repent, you shall keep your principal. Oppress none and no one will oppress you.
If a debtor is in want, give him time until his circumstances improve; but if you forego (the debt) as charity, that will be to your good, if you really understand.
Have fear of the day when you go back to God. Then each will be paid back in full his reward, and no one will be wronged.
O believers, when you negotiate a debt for a fixed term, draw up an agreement in writing, though better it would be to have a scribe write it faithfully down; and no scribe should refuse to write as God has taught him, and write what the borrower dictates, and have fear of God, his Lord, and not leave out a thing. If the borrower is deficient of mind or infirm, or unable to explain, let the guardian explain judiciously; and have two of your men to act as witnesses; but if two men are not available, then a man and two women you approve, so that in case one of them is confused the other may prompt her. When the witnesses are summoned they should not refuse (to come). But do not neglect to draw up a contract, big or small, with the time fixed for paying back the debt. This is more equitable in the eyes of God, and better as evidence and best for avoiding doubt. But if it is a deal about some merchandise requiring transaction face to face, there is no harm if no (contract is drawn up) in writing. Have witnesses to the deal, (and make sure) that the scribe or the witness is not harmed. If he is, it would surely be sinful on your part. And have fear of God, for God gives you knowledge, and God is aware of everything.
If you are on a journey and cannot find a scribe, pledge your goods (against the Loan); and if one trusts the other, then let him who is trusted deliver the thing entrusted, and have fear of God, his Lord. Do not suppress any evidence, for he who conceals evidence is sinful of heart; and God is aware of all you do.
To God belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth; and whether you reveal what is in your heart or conceal it, you will have to account for it to God who will pardon whom He please and punish whom He will, for God has the power over all things.
The Prophet believes in what has been revealed to him by his Lord, and so do the faithful. Each one believes in God and His angels, His Books and the prophets, and We make no distinction between the apostles. For they say: "We hear and obey, and we seek Your forgiveness, O Lord, for to You we shall journey in the end."
God does not burden a soul beyond capacity. Each will enjoy what (good) he earns, as indeed each will suffer from (the wrong) he does. Punish us not, O Lord, if we fail to remember or lapse into error. Burden us not, O Lord, with a burden as You did those before us. Impose not upon us a burden, O Lord, we cannot carry. Overlook our trespasses and forgive us, and have mercy upon us; You are our Lord and Master, help us against the clan of unbelievers.
