ALIF LAM MIM.
Do men think they will get away by saying: "We believe," and will not be tried?
We had tried those who were before them so that God knew who spoke the truth, and who were liars.
Do those who do evil think that they will get the better of Us? How bad is the judgement that they make!
He who hopes to meet God (should know) that God's appointed time will surely come. He is all-hearing and all-knowing.
He who strives does so for himself. Verily God is independent of the creatures of the world.
We shall pardon the sinful deeds of those who believe and do the right, and give them a reward better than their deeds.
We have enjoined on man to be good to his parents; but if they try to make you associate with Me that of which you have no knowledge, then do not obey them. You have to come back to Us, when I will tell you what you used to do.
We shall admit those who believe and do the right among the righteous.
There are among men those who say: "We believe in God;" yet if they happen to suffer in the cause of God they take oppression by men as punishment from God. And if help comes to them from your Lord, they say: "We were with you." Does not God know what is hidden in the hearts of men?
God will surely know the believers and know the hypocrites.
Those who deny say to those who affirm: "Follow our way; we shall carry the burden of your sins." But they cannot carry the burden of their sins in the least. They are liars indeed.
They will carry their own loads and other loads besides their own; and will surely be questioned on the Day of Resurrection about what they contrived.
We sent Noah to his people, and he lived with them a thousand years minus fifty. Then they were caught by the deluge for they were evil.
But We saved him and those with him in the ark, and made it a sign for the creatures of the world.
And (remember) Abraham who said to his people: "Worship God and be obedient to Him. This is better for you if you understand.
You worship idols in place of God and invent lies. Surely those you worship other than God have no power over your means of livelihood. So seek your sustenance from God, and worship Him and give Him thanks. To Him will you be brought back in the end.
But if you deny, then many a people have denied before you. The duty of the apostle is to convey the message clearly."
Do they not see how God originates creation, then reverts it back? This is indeed how inevitably the law of God works;
Say: "Travel on the earth and see how He originated creation. Then (you will know) how God will raise the last raising (of the dead). Surely God has power over everything,
Punish whom He will, and have mercy on whom He please. And to Him will you be brought back in the end.
Escape Him you cannot either in the earth or in the sky; and you have no friend or helper apart from God.
Those who deny the signs of God and the meeting with Him, cannot have hope of My mercy. There is a painful punishment for them.
The people (of Abraham) had no answer except: "Kill him or burn him;" but God saved him from the fire. There are lessons in this for those who believe.
He said: "You have taken to idols through mutual affection in this life, in place of God, but on the Day of Resurrection you will disown and curse each other, and your abode will be Hell, and you will have none to help you."
Then Lot believed in him; and (Abraham) said: "I will separate myself and take refuge in my Lord. Surely He is all-mighty and all-wise."
So We bestowed on him Isaac and Jacob and gave his progeny prophethood and scripture, and rewarded him in this world, and in the next he will be among the upright.
And (remember) Lot when he said to his people: "You indulge in lecherous acts which none of the creatures had done before you.
You commit unnatural acts with men and cut off the way (of procreation), and commit obscenities in your gatherings." The only answer his people made was: "Bring the punishment of God, if you are truthful."
"O Lord, help me against the wicked people,"(Lot) prayed.
When Our messengers came to Abraham with good news, they said: "We have to destroy this city as its inhabitants have become sinful."
He said: "Surely Lot is there." They answered: "We know who is there. We are to save him and his family except his wife, for she is one of those who will stay behind."
So, when Our messengers came to Lot, he was worried on their account as he was unable to protect them. They said: "Have no fear or regret. We will certainly save you and your family except your wife, for she is one of those who will stay behind.
We have to bring a scourge from the heavens on the people of this city as they are depraved."
Verily We have left a clear sign of this for people of sense to see.
To Midian We sent their brother Shu'aib. He said: "O people, worship God and be ready for the Day of Resurrection. Do no evil, and create no mischief in the land."
But they denied him and were seized by an earthquake, and lay overturned in their homes in the morning.
And (remember) 'Ad and Thamud. It will be clear to you from their habitations (how they were destroyed), for Satan had made their deeds look attractive to them, and turned them away from the path; and yet they were a people of acumen.
(Remember) Qarun, Pharaoh and Haman to whom Moses came with clear signs; but they were haughty (and oppressed) the land. Yet they could not run away from Us;
And We seized all of them for their crimes. Against some We sent a violent wind hurling stones, and some We seized with a mighty blast, and some We submerged under the earth, and some We drowned. It was not for God to wrong them, they wronged themselves.
The semblance of those who take protectors besides God is that of the spider. She arranges a house for herself, but the flimsiest of houses is the spider's. If only they had sense!
Verily God knows what they invoke in His place, for He is all-mighty and all-wise.
These are precepts of wisdom We offer to men, but only those who are rational understand.
God has created the heavens and the earth with reason. Surely in this is a sign for those who believe.
Recite what has been revealed to you of this Book, and be constant in devotion. Surely prayer keeps you away from the obscene and detestable, but the remembrance of God is greater far; and God knows what you do.
Do not argue with the people of the Book unless in a fair way, apart from those who act wrongly, and say to them: "We believe what has been sent down to us, and we believe what has been sent down to you. Our God and your God is one, and to Him we submit."
That is how We have revealed this Book to you and those to whom We have sent down the Book will believe in it. Only those who are infidels will deny it.
You did not read any Scripture before this, nor wrote one with your right hand, or else these dissemblers would have found a cause to doubt it.
In fact, in the minds of those who have intelligence these are clear signs. No one denies Our revelations except those who are unjust.
For they say: "How Is it no signs were sent down to him from his Lord?" Say: "The signs are with God. I am only a warner, plain and simple."
Is it not sufficient for them that We have revealed the Book to you which is read out to them? It is indeed a grace and reminder for people who believe.
Say: "God is sufficient as witness between me and you." He knows what is in the heavens and the earth. It is those who believe in falsehood and disbelieve in God who will perish.
They want you to hasten the punishment: But for a time already determined the punishment would have come upon them. It will come upon them all too suddenly, and they will be caught unawares.
They want you to hasten the punishment: Hell will indeed surround the unbelievers.
The day the punishment comes upon them from above and underneath their feet, (God will) say: "And now taste of what you had done."
O My creatures who believe, surely My earth has plenty of scope and so worship only Me.
Every soul has to know the taste of death. You will then be sent back to Us.
We shall admit those who believe and do the right to empyreal gardens with rivers rippling by, where they will abide for ever. How excellent the guerdon of those who toil,
Who persevere and place their trust in their Lord.
How many living things there are on the earth that do not Store their food; God provides them as well as you. He is all-hearing and all-knowing.
If you ask them: "Who created the heavens and the earth, and who set the sun and the moon to work?" They will answer: "God." Why then do they vacillate?
God increases the means of those of His creatures as He please, or limits them for whomsoever He will. He is certainly cognisant of everything.
If you ask them: "Who sends down rain from the sky and quickens the earth when it is dead?" They will answer: "God." Say: "All praise be to God." But most of them do not understand.
The life of this world is only a sport and play. It is surely the home of the Hereafter that will indeed be life extended and new, if only they knew!
When they board a ship they call on God, placing their faith wholly in Him. But when He brings them safely back to shore, they begin to associate others with Him,
And deny what We had given them, in order to go on enjoying themselves. They will come to know soon.
Do they not see that We have given them a safe sanctuary, while all around them men are being despoiled? Do they then believe what is false, and deny the bounty of God?
Who is more unjust than he who fabricates a lie about God, or denies the truth when it has come to him? Is there not an abode for unbelievers in Hell?
We shall guide those who strive in Our cause to the paths leading straight to Us. Surely God is with those who do good.
