I CALL TO witness those who stand arrayed in rows,
And those who restrain by reprimanding,
And those who recite the Reminder,
Verily your God is One,
The Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them, and the Lord of the Easts.
He decked the nearest heavens with ornaments of stars,
Protecting them against every wayward devil,
So that they are not able to listen to the angels of higher (echelons), and are pelted from all sides
And kept far away. There is perpetual punishment for them,
Except those who eavesdrop and are pursued by a shooting flame.
So ask them if they are more difficult to create, or the rest We have created? Indeed (man) We created from fermented clay.
Yet while you are filled with wonder, they just scoff;
And when they are warned they pay no heed.
When they see a sign, they laugh at it,
And say: "This is only magic.
When we are dead and turned to dust and bones, how can we be raised again,
And our fathers too?"
You say: "Yes; and you will be lowly made."
There will only be a single jerk, and they will gape,
And say: "Ah woe! This is the Day of Reckoning."
"(Yes,) this is the Day of Judgement you had called a lie."
Gather all the wicked together and their comrades, and those they had worshipped
Other than God," (the angels will be told), "then show them the way to Hell,
And detain them, for they will be questioned."
"What is the matter with you that you do not help each other?"
They will submit to questioning then,
And some of them will confront the others,
Saying: "It were you who imposed yourselves upon us."
They will say: "No, you were the ones who would not believe.
We had no power over you. In fact, you were a people rebellious.
The sentence of our Lord has come true for us. We have certainly to taste (the punishment),
For we had led you astray. In fact we ourselves were astray."
So, they will become partners in punishment.
That is how We deal with sinners.
They were those who, when it was said to them, "There is no god but God," behaved with insolence,
And said: "Should we abandon our gods for the sake of an insane poet?"
Not in the least. He has brought the truth and confirmed the other messengers.
You will indeed taste a painful punishment,
And be rewarded but only for what you had done,
Except the chosen creatures of God,
Whose provision is predetermined --
Fruits of every kind, and they will be honoured
In gardens of delight,
(Sitting) on couches, face to face,
With cups from a flowing stream being passed around,
Clear, delicious to drink,
Neither dulling the senses nor intoxicating,
And with them maidens of modest look and large lustrous eyes,
Like sheltered eggs in a nest.
Then one turned to the other in an enquiry.
Said one of the speakers: "I had a friend
Who used to say: 'Are you one of those who can testify to the truth?
(Do you think) we would be paid back our due when we are dead and reduced to dust and bones?'
He said: 'Will you look down?'
He looked down and saw (his friend) in the midst of Hell.
'By God', he said, 'you had almost ruined me.
Had it not been for the grace of my Lord I too would have been there (in Hell).
(Another will say:)"Is it true, we are not going to die
Other than our first death, and we shall not be punished?
This will indeed be great happiness.
For this the toilers should strive."
Is this better or the tree of Zaqqum
Which We have reserved as punishment for evil-doers?
It is a tree that grows at the bottom of Hell.
Its spathes are like the prickly pear.
They will eat and fill their bellies with it,
Washing it down with boiling water.
Then to Hell they will surely be returned.
They had found their fathers astray,
Yet they hasten to follow in their footsteps.
So had many an earlier people gone astray,
And We had sent admonishers to them.
Look, then how was the end of those who had been warned,
Other than the chosen creatures of God.
Noah had verily called to Us. And how gracious was He who answered (him).
We saved him and his family from the great affliction,
And made his progeny survive,
And left (his name) for posterity.
Peace on Noah among all men.
That is how We reward those who do good.
Surely he was among Our faithful creatures.
Afterwards We drowned the others.
And Abraham indeed was of his inducement,
When he came to his Lord with a heart compliant,
When he said to his father and his people: "What is this you worship?
Why do you solicit false gods instead of God?
What do you imagine the Lord of the worlds to be?"
Then he looked up at the stars (they worshipped),
And said: "I am sick (of what you worship)!"
But they turned their backs on him and went away.
Then he turned towards their gods and said: "Why do you not eat (of these offerings)?
What is wrong with you that you do not speak?"
Then he started striking them down with his right hand.
So the people descended upon him.
"Why do you worship these you carve yourselves," he asked,
"When God has created you and what you make?"
"Build a pyre for him and throw him into the raging fire."
So they contrived a plot against him, but We made them abject.
And he said: "I am going away to my Lord who will show me the way.
(And he prayed:) "O Lord, grant me a righteous son."
So We gave him the good news of a clement son.
When he was old enough to go about with him, he said: "O my son, I dreamt that I was sacrificing you. Consider, what you think?" He replied: "Father, do as you are commanded. If God pleases you will find me firm."
When they submitted to the will of God, and (Abraham) laid (his son) down prostrate on his temple,
We called out: "O Abraham,
You have fulfilled your dream." Thus do We reward the good.
That was indeed a trying test.
So We ransomed him for a great sacrifice,
And left (his hallowed memory) for posterity.
Peace be on Abraham.
That is how We reward those who do good.
He is truly among Our faithful creatures.
So We gave him the good news of Isaac, apostle, who is among the righteous.
And We blessed him and Isaac. Among their descendants are some who do good, but some who wrong themselves.
We were indeed gracious to Moses and Aaron,
And saved them and their people from great distress,
And helped them, so they were victorious.
We gave them the explicit Book,
And showed them the straight path,
And left (their remembrance) for posterity.
Peace be on Moses and Aaron.
That is how We reward those who do good.
They are among Our faithful devotees.
Verily Elias is one of the apostles.
When he said to his people: "Will you not be mindful of God?
Would you call on Baal and leave the best of creators,
God, your Lord, and the Lord of your fathers?"
They denied him, and will surely be brought to punishment,
Except the chosen creatures of God.
And We left his (memory) for posterity.
Peace be on Elias.
That is how We reward those who do good.
He is truly among Our faithful devotees.
Verily Lot was one of the apostles,
Wherefore We saved him and his entire family
Except an old woman who was one of those who stayed behind.
Then We destroyed the others.
You pass by (their habitations) in the morning
Or at night. Then how is it you do not understand?
Verily Jonah is one of the apostles.
When he fled on the laden ship,
And lots were cast (when a storm overtook them), he was rejected, (and thrown overboard).
Then he was swallowed by a large fish as he was worthy of blame.
Had he not been one of those who struggled hard,
He would have stayed in its belly till the day the dead are raised.
So We cast him, sick, on a barren shore,
And We made a gourd tree grow over him.
We sent him to a hundred thousand men or more,
And they came to believe; so We allowed them to enjoy the good things of life for an age.
Now ask them if their Lord has daughters, and they sons?
Or did We make the angels females, and they witnessed it?
Is it not a lie invented by them when they say:
"God has begotten (children)?" They are liars indeed!
Does He prefer sons to daughters?
What ails you that you judge in such a wise?
Why do you not reflect?
Or have you received some clear authority?
Then bring your scripture, if what you say is true.
They link Him with jinns by lineage, yet the jinns know they will be brought before Him.
God is too glorious for what they ascribe to Him
Except His chosen creatures who do not.
So neither you nor those you worship
Can mislead anyone away from Him,
Except one who is (destined) to burn in Hell.
"There is not one of us who does not have his appointed place," (declare the angels.)
"And we are truly those who stand in rows,
And we are those who sing hallelujas to Him."
They used to say:
If we had the account of earlier people with us,
We would have been the chosen creatures of God."
Yet now (that it has come) they refuse to believe in it; but they will come to know soon.
Our word had already been given before to Our votaries, the apostles, --
That they would be helped,
And that certainly Our armies will be victorious.
So you ignore them for a time
And wait; they will come to know soon.
Do they want to hasten Our punishment?
When it comes down on their plains, it will be an evil dawn for those who had been warned.
So turn away from them for a time
And watch; they will come to know soon.
Too glorious is your Lord, the Lord of power, for what they ascribe to Him.
So peace be on the messengers,
And all praise to God, the Lord of all the worlds.
