HA MIM.
A revelation from the most benevolent, ever-merciful,
A Book whose verses have been distinguished and explained, a lucid discourse for people who understand,
Announcing happy news and warnings. And yet most of them are averse and do not listen,
And say: "Our hearts are immured against what you call us to. There is a deafness in our ears, and a veil lies between us and you. So act (your way), we are acting (ours)."
Say: "I am a man like you, (but) it is revealed to me that your God is one God, so take the straight path to Him, and ask Him to forgive your sins. Woe to the idolaters
Who do not give a due share of their wealth for the welfare of others, and do not believe in the Hereafter.
But those who believe and do the right, will have a continuing reward.
Say: "Do you refuse to believe in Him who created the earth in two spans of time, and set up compeers to Him, the Lord of all the worlds?
He placed firm stabilisers rising above its surface, blessed it with plenty and growth, and ingrained the means of growing its food within it, sufficient for all seekers, in four spans.
Then He turned to the heavens, and it was smoke. So He said to it and the earth: "Come with willing obedience or perforce." They said: "We come willingly."
Then He created several skies in two spans, and ingrained in each sky its function, decking the nearest heaven with lamps, and guarded it. This has been determined by the mighty and all-knowing.
If even then they turn away, tell them: "I forewarn you of a terrible punishment like the thunderbolt that fell upon the 'Ad and Thamud."
Their apostles came to them one after the other (saying): "Do not worship any one but God." They said: "If our Lord had pleased He would have sent the angels down. We reject what is sent with you."
So those who were 'Ad turned insolent unjustly in the land, and said: "Who is stronger than us?" Did they not see that God who created them was greater far in power than they? Yet they refused to believe Our signs.
So We let loose on them a violent wind for several days of distress to make them taste a most disgraceful punishment here in this world, and far more shameful will be the punishment in the Hereafter, and there will be no succour for them.
As for the (tribe of) Thamud, We tried to guide them, but they preferred blindness to guidance; then they were seized by the torment of a humiliating punishment as requital for their misdeeds;
But We saved those who believed and took heed for themselves.
The day the enemies of God will be gathered at the Fire and the records of their deeds will be distributed,
So that when they reach it their ears and eyes and persons will testify to what they did.
And they will say to their bodies: "Why did you testify against us?" They will answer: "God, who gave all things power of articulation, made us speak. It is He who created you the first time, and to Him you will return.
You did not hide your (doings) so that your ears or eyes or persons should not testify against you. In fact you thought that God did not know the things you used to do.
It is this notion you had of your Lord that caused your ruin, and you are lost."
Even if they are patient, their abode is Hell; and if they beg for favour, none will favour them.
We had assigned to them close companions who made their past and present look attractive to them; and the fate that had once befallen the communities of jinns and men before them was justified upon them. They were indeed bound to perish.
The disbelievers say: "Do not listen to this Qur'an, and shout away (its reading); you may haply prevail."
We shall make the disbelievers taste the severest punishment, and retribute them for the worst that they had done.
This is the requital for God's enemies: Hell, where they will have their lasting home, as punishment for denying Our revelations.
Those who disbelieve will say: "O Lord, show us those among the jinns and men who had led us astray that we may trample them underfoot and make them wholly abject."
Surely the angels will come down to those who say, 'Our Lord is God' and then remain steadfast, saying: "You should have neither fear nor regret, but rejoice in the happy news of Paradise that has been promised you.
We are your friends in this life and in the Hereafter where you will get whatever your hearts desire, and have whatsoever you ask for,
As a gift from the forgiving, ever-merciful (God)."
Whose word is better than his who calls to God and does the right, and says: "I am of the obedient?"
Good and evil are not alike. Repel evil with what is good. Then you will find your erstwhile enemy like a close. affectionate friend.
Only they attain it who forbear, and only a man of great good fortune can achieve it.
If the Devil incite you to evil, seek refuge in God. He is all-hearing and all-knowing.
The night and day and the sun and moon are (only) some of His signs. So do not bow before the sun and the moon, but bow in homage to God who created them, if you truly worship Him.
But if they become haughty (then remember) that those who are close to your Lord sing His praises night and day and do not grow weary of (doing so).
It is among His signs that the earth you see all barren and desolate begins to stir and sprout when We send down rain upon it. Surely He who gives it life will also give life to the dead. Indeed He has power over everything.
Surely those who slander Our signs are not hidden from Us. Then, is he better who will be cast into Hell, or he who will come out safe on the Day of Resurrection? Do whatever you will, He sees whatsoever you do.
Those who reject the Reminder when it has come to them (should know) that it is a Book inviolate.
Falsehood cannot enter it from any side: It's a revelation from the all-wise and praiseworthy (God).
Nothing is said to you which had not been said to other apostles before you. Surely your Lord is the lord of forgiveness, but also the lord of severe retribution.
If We had made it a discourse in an obscure tongue, they would have said: "Why were its revelations not expounded distinctly? A foreign tongue and an Arab (audience)?" Say: "For those who believe it is a guidance and a healing; but for those who do not believe it is a deafness in the ears, and a blindness. They are those one calls to from far away.
Verily We gave Moses the Book; but they began to differ about it. If the Word of your Lord had not preceded it the matter would have been settled between them. They are still in doubt about it and uneasy.
Whoever does good does so for himself, and whoever does wrong bears the guilt thereof. Your Lord does no wrong to His creatures.
He alone has knowledge of the Hour (of change): No fruit comes Out of its spathe, no female conceives or gives birth, but He has knowledge of it. The day He will call them (and ask): "Where are the compeers (you ascribed to Me)?" They will answer: "We profess to You not one of us can vouch for them."
And those they used to worship will leave them in the lurch, and they will realise there is no escape for them.
Man never tires of praying for good; but if evil assails him he begins to despair.
If We give him a taste of Our favour after some distress he has known, he says: "It was my due. I cannot imagine the Hour will come. And even if I go back to my Lord, there will surely still be the best for me with Him." We shall tell those who do not believe what they used to do, and inflict on them a heavy punishment.
When We show Our favours to man he moves away and turns aside; but when in trouble he prays a great deal.
Say: "Just think. If this is from God and you deny it, who will be in greater error than he who is in open dissent?"
We will show Our signs to them in the horizons of the external world and within themselves, until it becomes clear to them that it's the truth. Is your Lord not sufficient? He is a witness over all things.
In truth they are in doubt that they will ever face their Lord. Do they not know that He surrounds all things?
