QAF. I CALL to witness the glorious Qur'an.
They are rather surprised that a warner from among themselves has come to them. So the unbelievers say: "This is astonishing:
When we are dead and turned to dust, this returning (to life) is most far-fetched."
We know what the earth consumes of them, for We have the Book that preserves everything.
But no! They called the truth a lie when it came to them; so they are in a confused state.
Have they not looked at the sky above them, how We have fashioned and adorned it, and it has no flaw?
We stretched the earth and placed upon it firm stabilisers and We made every kind of splendid thing to grow upon it
As instruction and reminder to every penitent creature.
And We send down water as a blessing from the sky, and grow gardens with it and the grain for harvest,
And tall date-palms with their spathes pile on pile
As a provision for men, and enlivened a region that was dead. Even thus will be the life after death.
The people of Noah, Ar-Rass and Thamud denied before you,
As did the people of 'Ad and Pharaoh and the brethren of Lot,
And the dwellers of the Wood and people of Tubba'. Each of them denied the apostles. So My threat became a reality.
Were We exhausted by the act of the first creation? And yet they are confused about a new creation.
He created man and surely know what misdoubts arise in their hearts; for We are closer to him than his jugular vein.
When the two (angels) who keep the account, one sitting on the right, one on the left, take it down,
There is not a word he utters but an observer is ready (to make note of it).
The palsy of death will surely come. This is what you wished to avert.
And the trumpet blast will sound: It would be the Day of Doom.
Each soul will come with a driver and a witness.
(And the driver will say:) "You were oblivious of this, so we have removed the veil, and how keen is your sight today!"
His companion will say: "Here is (the record) I have ready with me."
"Cast each stubborn unbeliever into Hell," (they will be told),
"Every obstructor of good, transgressor, and the sceptic,
Who had set up another god with God. Cast him into severe torment."
His companion will say: "O Lord, I did not lead him to wickedness, but he was himself far astray."
"Do not argue in My presence. I had announced the promise of doom in advance.
There is no changing of My word, nor am I unjust to My creatures."
We shall ask Hell that day: "Are you full?" It will answer: "Are there still more?"
And Paradise will be brought near, not far from those who took heed for themselves and feared God.
"This is what you had been promised," (will be said) to every penitent who remembered (his duty),
Who feared Ar-Rahman in secret, and came with a penitent heart:
"Enter it in peace. This is the day of life abiding."
Theirs will be whatsoever they wish: And with Us there is more.
How many generations have We destroyed before them who were mightier in power than they. Then they searched throughout the land to see if there was a way of escape.
Surely there is a reminder in this for whosoever has a heart (to feel), or takes heed.
We created the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them, in six spans, and no weariness came upon Us.
So you bear with patience what they say, and sing the praises of your Lord before the rising of the sun and its setting,
And glorify Him for some portion of the night, and additional adorations.
Take heed that the day the crier calls from a place close (to every one),
The day they actually hear the blast, will be the Day of rising of the dead.
We are the one who give life and death, and to Us will be the destination.
The day the earth will split asunder they will come out hurriedly. This gathering together is easy for Us.
We are cognisant of what they say; but it is not for you to compel them. So keep on reminding through the Qur'an whoever fears My warning.
