I CALL TO WITNESS those who are sent consecutively,
And those that strike violently,
And those that revive by quickening,
And those that distinguish distinctly,
And those that bring down the Reminder
To end all argument or to warn.
What is promised will surely come to pass.
When the stars are obliterated,
The heavens split asunder,
The mountains reduced to dust and blown away,
And when the time comes for raising the little girls (buried alive) --
For what day is that time fixed?
The Day of Judgement.
How will you comprehend what the Day of Judgement is?
Alas the woe that day for those who deny!
Have We not destroyed the earlier generations?
So shall We make the later ones to follow them.
That is what We shall do to those who are guilty of crime.
Alas the woe that day for those who deny!
Did We not create you from contemptible water?
Then We lodged you in a secure place (the womb)
For a certain appointed time,
Then We facilitated (your birth). How well do We calculate!
Alas the woe that day for those who deny!
Have We not made the earth a repository
For the living and the dead,
And placed in it lofty and broad stablisers, and gave you sweet water to drink?
Alas the woe that day for those who deny!
"Go to what you used to deny;
Go to the shadow with three ramifications,
Neither shady nor protecting against the blazing Fire.
It will throw out sparks as logs of wood
So like golden camels."
Alas the woe that day for those who deny!
They will not be able to speak that day,
Nor given leave to make excuses.
Alas the woe that day for those who deny!
That will be the Day of Reckoning. Gathered will be (you) and the earlier (generations).
So if you have any plot to devise against Me, then devise it.
Alas the woe that day for those who deny!
Those who take heed for themselves and fear God, will be amidst shade and springs of water,
And such fruits as they desire.
"Eat and drink with relish as reward for what you had done."
That is how We reward the good.
Alas the woe that day for those who deny!
Eat and enjoy for a while: You are certainly sinners.
Alas the woe that day for those who deny!
When it is said to them: "Bow in homage," they do not bow.
Alas the woe that day for those who deny!
In what other lore after this will they then believe?
