OF WHAT ARE they asking one another?
(Is it) of the great announcement
About which they have been differing?
Indeed they will come to know soon;
They will indeed come to know soon.
Did We not make the earth a spreading,
The mountains tent-pins?
We created you in pairs,
And made sleep for you to rest,
The night a covering,
And the day for seeking livelihood.
We raised over you several secure (skies),
And placed a lamp therein brightly burning.
And We sent down rain from water-laden clouds pouring in torrents
That We may produce from it grain and vegetation,
And orchards full of trees and interlacing boughs.
Surely a time is fixed for the Day of Judgement.
The day the trumpet blast is sounded you will come in hordes;
The heavens will be opened wide and turn into so many doors,
The mountains put in motion turning into a mirage.
Certainly Hell lies in wait,
The rebels' abode,
Where they will remain for aeons,
Finding neither sleep nor any thing to drink
Except boiling water and benumbing cold:
, A fitting reward.
They were those who did not expect a reckoning,
And rejected Our signs as lies.
We have kept account of everything in a book.
So taste (the fruit of what you sowed), for We shall add nothing but torment,
As for those who preserve themselves from evil and follow the straight path, there is attainment for them:
Orchards and vineyards,
And graceful maidens of the same age,
And flasks full and flowing.
They will hear no blasphemies there or disavowals:
A recompense from your Lord, a sufficient gift,
The Lord of the heavens and the earth, and all that lies between them, most benevolent, to whom none may dare address a word.
The day the Spirit takes its stand, with the angels ranged in rows. None will speak except who is permitted by Ar-Rahman and says what is right.
That day is certain. So whosoever likes may prepare a way to his Lord.
We have indeed warned you of a calamity near at hand, a day when man will see what he had sent (of his deeds) ahead, and the unbeliever will say: "Woe alas. Ah would that I were dust!"
