By the [angels] ranged in ranks,
by the ones who drive [the clouds] vigorously,
by the ones who recite the reminder:
indeed your God is certainly One,
the Lord of the heavens and the earth and whatever is between them, and the Lord of the easts.
Indeed We have adorned the lowest heaven with the finery of the stars,
and to guard from any froward devil.
They do not eavesdrop on the Supernal Elite—they are shot at from every side,
to drive them away, and there is a perpetual punishment for them—
except any who snatches a snatch, whereat a piercing flame pursues him.
Ask them, is their creation more prodigious or [that of other creatures] that We have created? Indeed, We created them from a viscous clay.
Indeed you wonder, while they engage in ridicule,
and [even] when admonished do not take admonition,
and when they see a sign they make it an object of ridicule,
and say, ‘This is nothing but plain magic!’
‘What! When we are dead and have become dust and bones, shall we be resurrected?
And our forefathers too?!’
Say, ‘Yes! And you will be utterly humble.’
It will be only a single shout and, behold, they will look on,
and say, ‘Woe to us! This is the Day of Retribution!’
‘This is the Day of Judgement that you used to deny!’
‘Muster the wrongdoers and their mates and what they used to worship
besides Allah, and show them the way to hell!
[But first] stop them! For they must be questioned.’
‘Why is it that you do not support one another [today]?’
‘Indeed, they are [meek and] submissive today!’
Some of them will turn to others, questioning each other.
They will say, ‘Indeed you used to accost us peremptorily.’
They will answer, ‘No, you [yourselves] had no faith.
We had no authority over you. No, you [yourselves] were a rebellious lot.
So our Lord’s word became due against us that we shall indeed taste [the punishment].
So we perverted you, for we were perverse [ourselves].’
So, that day they will share the punishment.
Indeed, that is how We deal with the guilty.
Indeed, it was they who, when they were told, ‘There is no god except Allah,’ used to be disdainful,
and [they would] say, ‘Shall we abandon our gods for a crazy poet?’
Indeed, he has brought [them] the truth, and confirmed the [earlier] apostles.
Indeed you will taste the painful punishment,
and you will be requited only for what you used to do
—[all] except Allah’s exclusive servants.
For such there is a known provision
—fruits—and they will be held in honour,
in the gardens of bliss,
[reclining] on couches, facing one another,
served around with a cup, from a clear fountain,
snow-white, delicious to the drinkers,
wherein there will be neither headache nor will it cause them stupefaction,
and with them will be maidens, of restrained glances with big [beautiful] eyes,
as if they were hidden ostrich eggs.
Some of them will turn to others, questioning each other.
One of them will say, ‘Indeed I had a companion
who used to say, ‘‘Are you really among those who affirm
that when we have died and become dust and bones, we shall be brought to retribution?’’ ’
He will say, ‘Will you have a look?’
Then he will take a look and sight him in the middle of hell.
He will say, ‘By Allah, you had almost ruined me!
Had it not been for my Lord’s blessing, I too would have been among those mustered [in hell]!’
‘Is it [true] that we shall not die [anymore],
aside from our earlier death, and that we shall not be punished?
This is indeed the supreme triumph!’
Let all workers work for the like of this!
Is this a better reception, or the Zaqqum tree?
Indeed We have made it a punishment for the wrongdoers.
It is a tree that rises from the depths of hell.
Its spathes are as if they were devils’ heads.
They will eat from it and gorge with it their bellies.
On top of that they will take a solution of scalding water.
Then their retreat will be toward hell.
They had found their fathers astray,
yet they press onwards in their footsteps.
Most of the former peoples went astray before them,
and We had certainly sent warners among them.
So observe how was the fate of those who were warned
—[all] except Allah’s exclusive servants!
Certainly Noah called out to Us, and how well did We respond!
We delivered him and his family from their great distress,
and made his descendants the survivors,
and left for him a good name among posterity:
‘Peace to Noah, throughout the nations!’
Thus do We reward the virtuous.
He is indeed one of Our faithful servants.
Then We drowned the rest.
Indeed Abraham was among his followers,
when he came to his Lord with a sound heart [untainted by sin].
When he said to his father and his people, ‘What is it that you are worshiping?
Is it a lie, gods other than Allah, that you desire?
Then what is your idea about the Lord of all the worlds?’
Then he made an observation of the stars
and said, ‘Indeed I am sick!’
So they went away leaving him behind.
Then he stole away to their gods and said, ‘Will you not eat?
Why do you not speak?’
Then he attacked them, striking forcefully.
They came running towards him.
He said, ‘Do you worship what you have yourselves carved,
when Allah has created you and whatever you make?’
They said, ‘Build a structure for him and cast him into a huge fire.’
So they sought to outwit him, but We made them the lowermost.
He said, ‘Indeed I am going toward my Lord, who will guide me.’
‘My Lord! Give me [an heir], one of the righteous.’
So We gave him the good news of a forbearing son.
When he was old enough to assist in his endeavour, he said, ‘My son! I see in dreams that I am sacrificing you. See what you think.’ He said, ‘Father! Do whatever you have been commanded. If Allah wishes, you will find me to be patient.’
So when they had both surrendered [to Allah’s will], and he had laid him down on his forehead,
We called out to him, ‘O Abraham!
You have indeed fulfilled your vision! Thus indeed do We reward the virtuous!
This was indeed a manifest test.’
Then We ransomed him with a great sacrifice,
and left for him a good name in posterity:
‘Peace be to Abraham!’
Thus do We reward the virtuous.
He is indeed one of Our faithful servants.
And We gave him the good news of [the birth of] Isaac, a prophet, one of the righteous.
And We blessed him and Isaac. Among their descendants [some] are virtuous, and [some] who manifestly wrong themselves.
Certainly We favoured Moses and Aaron,
and delivered them and their people from their great distress,
and We helped them so that they became the victors.
We gave them the illuminating scripture
and guided them to the straight path,
and left for them a good name in posterity.
‘Peace be to Moses and Aaron!’
Thus indeed do We reward the virtuous.
They are indeed among Our faithful servants.
Indeed Ilyas was one of the apostles.
When he said to his people, ‘Will you not be Godwary?
Do you invoke Baal and abandon the best of creators,
Allah, your Lord and Lord of your forefathers?,’
they impugned him. So they will indeed be mustered [in hell]
—[all] except Allah’s exclusive servants.
We left for him a good name in posterity.
‘Peace be to Ilyas!’
Thus indeed do We reward the virtuous.
He is indeed one of Our faithful servants.
Indeed Lot was one of the apostles.
When We delivered him and all his family,
excepting an old woman among those who remained behind,
We destroyed the rest.
Indeed you pass by them at dawn
and at night. Do you not exercise your reason?
Indeed Jonah was one of the apostles.
When he absconded toward the laden ship,
he drew lots with them and was the one to be condemned [as one to be thrown overboard].
Then the fish swallowed him while he was blameworthy.
Had he not been one of those who celebrate Allah’s glory,
he would have surely remained in its belly till the day they will be resurrected.
Then We cast him on a bare shore, and he was sick.
So We made a gourd plant grow above him.
We sent him to a [community of] hundred thousand or more,
and they believed [in him]. So We provided for them for a while.
Ask them, are daughters to be for your Lord while sons are to be for them?
Did We create the angels females while they were present?
Be aware that it is out of their mendacity that they say,
‘Allah has begotten [offsprings],’ and they indeed speak a falsehood.
Has He preferred daughters to sons?
What is the matter with you? How do you judge?
Will you not then take admonition?
Do you have a manifest authority?
Then produce your scripture, should you be truthful.
And they have set up a kinship between Him and the jinn, while the jinn certainly know that they will be presented [before Him].
Clear is Allah of whatever they allege [about Him]
—[all] except Allah’s exclusive servants.
Indeed you and what you worship
cannot mislead [anyone] about Him,
except someone who is bound for hell.
‘There is none among us but has a known place.
It is we who are the ranged ones.
It is we who celebrate Allah’s glory.’
They indeed, used to say,
‘Had we possessed a Reminder from our predecessors,
we would have surely been Allah’s exclusive servants.’
But they disbelieved it [when it came to them]. Soon they will know!
Certainly Our decree has gone beforehand in favour of Our servants, the apostles,
that they will indeed receive [Allah’s] help,
and indeed Our hosts will be the victors.
So leave them alone for a while,
and watch them; soon they will see [the truth of the matter]!
Do they seek to hasten Our punishment?
But when it descends in their courtyard it will be a dismal dawn for those who had been warned.
So leave them alone for a while,
and watch; soon they will see!
Clear is your Lord, the Lord of Might, of whatever they allege [concerning Him].
Peace be to the apostles!
All praise belongs to Allah, Lord of all the worlds.
