Ha, Meem,
‘Ayn, Seen, Qaf.
Allah, the All-mighty and the All-wise, thus reveals to you and to those who were before you:
whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth belongs to Him, and He is the All-exalted, the All-supreme.
The heavens are about to be rent apart from above them, while the angels celebrate the praise of their Lord and plead for forgiveness for those [faithful] who are on the earth. Indeed, Allah is the All-forgiving, the All-merciful!
As for those who have taken awliya besides Him, Allah is watchful over them, and you are not their keeper.
Thus have We revealed to you an Arabic Quran that you may warn [the people of] the Mother of the Towns and those around it, and warn [them] of the Day of Gathering, in which there is no doubt, [whereupon] a part [of mankind] will be in paradise and a part will be in the Blaze.
Had Allah wished, He would have surely made them one community; but He admits whomever He wishes into His mercy, and the wrongdoers do not have any guardian or helper.
Have they taken awliya besides Him? [Say,] ‘It is Allah, who is the [true] Wali, and He revives the dead, and He has power over all things.
Whatever thing you may differ about, its judgement is with Allah. That is Allah, my Lord. In Him, I have put my trust, and to Him do I turn penitently.
The originator of the heavens and the earth, He made for you mates from your own selves, and mates of the cattle, by which means He multiplies you. Nothing is like Him, and He is the All-hearing, the All-seeing.
To Him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth: He expands the provision for whomever He wishes, and tightens it [for whomever He wishes]. Indeed He has knowledge of all things.’
He has prescribed for you the religion which He had enjoined upon Noah and which We have [also] revealed to you, and which We had enjoined upon Abraham, Moses and Jesus, declaring, ‘Maintain the religion, and do not be divided in it.’ Hard on the polytheists is that to which you summon them. Allah chooses for it whomever He wishes, and He guides to it whomever returns penitently [to Him].
They did not divide [into sects] except after the knowledge had come to them, out of envy among themselves; and were it not for a prior decree of your Lord [granting them reprieve] until a specified time, decision would have been made between them. Indeed those who were made heirs to the Book after them are in grave doubt concerning it.
So summon to this [unity of religion], and be steadfast, just as you have been commanded, and do not follow their desires, and say, ‘I believe in whatever Book Allah has sent down. I have been commanded to do justice among you. Allah is our Lord and your Lord. Our deeds belong to us and your deeds belong to you. There is no quarrel between us and you. Allah will bring us together and toward Him is the destination.’
Those who argue concerning Allah, after His call has been answered, their argument stands refuted with their Lord, and upon them shall be [His] wrath, and there is a severe punishment for them.
It is Allah who has sent down the Book with the truth and [He has sent down] the Balance. What do you know—maybe the Hour is near!
Those who do not believe in it ask [you] to hasten it, but those who have faith are apprehensive of it, and know that it is true. Indeed those who are in doubt about the Hour are in extreme error!
Allah is all-attentive to His servants. He provides for whomever He wishes, and He is the All-strong, the All-mighty.
Whoever desires the tillage of the Hereafter, We will enhance for him his tillage, and whoever desires the tillage of the world, We will give it to him, but he will have no share in the Hereafter.
Do they have deities [besides Allah] who have ordained for them a religion not permitted by Allah? Were it not for a [prior] conclusive word, judgement would have been made between them, and indeed a painful punishment awaits the wrongdoers.
When it is about to befall them, You will see the wrongdoers fearful because of what they have earned; but those who have faith and do righteous deeds will be in the gardens of paradise: they will have whatever they wish near their Lord. That is the mighty grace.
Such is the good news that Allah gives to His servants who have faith and do righteous deeds! Say, ‘I do not ask you any reward for it except the love of [my] relatives.’ Whoever performs a good deed, We shall enhance its goodness for him. Indeed Allah is all-forgiving, all-appreciative.
Do they say, ‘He has fabricated a lie against Allah’? If so, should Allah wish He would set a seal on your heart, and Allah will efface the falsehood and confirm the truth with His words. Indeed He knows well what is in the breasts.
It is He who accepts the repentance of His servants, and excuses their misdeeds and knows what you do.
He answers [the supplications of] those who have faith and do righteous deeds and enhances them out of His grace. But as for the faithless, there is a severe punishment for them.
Were Allah to expand the provision for [all] His servants, they would surely create havoc on the earth. But He sends down in a [precise] measure whatever He wishes. Indeed, He is all-aware, all-seeing about His servants.
It is He who sends down the rain after they have been despondent, and unfolds His mercy, and He is the Guardian, the All-laudable.
Among His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and whatever creatures He has scattered in them, and He is able to gather them whenever He wishes.
Whatever affliction that may visit you is because of what your hands have earned, and He excuses many [an offense of yours].
You cannot frustrate [Allah] on the earth, and you do not have besides Allah any guardian or helper.
Among His signs are the ships [that run] on the sea [appearing] like landmarks.
If He wishes He stills the wind, whereat they remain standstill on its surface. There are indeed signs in that for every patient and grateful [servant].
Or He wrecks them because of what they have earned, and He excuses many [an offense].
Let those who dispute Our signs know that there is no escape for them.
Whatever you have been given are the wares of the life of this world, but what is with Allah is better and more lasting for those who have faith and who put their trust in their Lord
—those who avoid major sins and indecencies, and forgive when angered;
those who answer their Lord, maintain the prayer, and [conduct] their affairs by counsel among themselves, and they spend out of what We have provided them;
those who, when afflicted by oppression, defend themselves.
The requital of evil is an evil like it, so whoever excuses and conciliates, his reward lies with Allah. Indeed, He does not like the wrongdoers.
As for those who retaliate after being wronged, there is no ground for action against them.
The ground for action is only against those who oppress the people and commit tyranny in the land in violation of justice. For such there will be a painful punishment.
As for someone who endures patiently and forgives—that is indeed the steadiest of courses.
Those whom Allah leads astray have no guardian apart from Him. You will see the wrongdoers, when they sight the punishment, saying, ‘Is there any way for a retreat?’
You will see them being exposed to it, humbled by abasement, furtively looking askance. The faithful will say, ‘Indeed the losers are those who have ruined themselves and their families on the Day of Resurrection. Indeed, the wrongdoers will abide in lasting punishment.
They have no awliya to help them besides Allah. There is no way out for those whom Allah leads astray.’
Respond to your Lord before there comes a day for which there will be no revoking from Allah. On that day you will have no refuge, nor will you have [any chance for] denial [of your sins].
But if they disregard [your warnings], [keep in mind that] We have not sent you as their keeper. Your duty is only to communicate. Indeed when We let man taste Our mercy, he boasts about it; but should an ill visit him because of what his hands have sent ahead, then man is very ungrateful.
To Allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. He creates whatever He wishes; He gives females to whomever He wishes, and males to whomever He wishes,
or He combines them males and females, and makes sterile whomever He wishes. Indeed, He is all-knowing, all-powerful.
It is not [possible] for any human that Allah should speak to him except through revelation or from behind a veil, or send a messenger who reveals by His permission whatever He wishes. Indeed He is all-exalted, all-wise.
Thus have We imbued you with a Spirit of Our command. You did not know what the Book is, nor what is faith; but We made it a light that We may guide by its means whomever We wish of Our servants. Indeed, you guide to a straight path,
the path of Allah, to whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth. Indeed all matters return to Allah!
