Ha, Meem.
By the Manifest Book!
We sent it down on a blessed night, and We have been warning [mankind].
Every definitive matter is resolved on it,
as an ordinance from Us. We have been sending [apostles]
as a mercy from your Lord—indeed He is the All-hearing, the All-knowing—
the Lord of the heavens and the earth, and whatever is between them, should you have conviction.
There is no god except Him: He gives life and brings death, your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers.
But they play around in doubt.
So watch out for the day when the sky brings on a manifest smoke,
enveloping the people. [They will cry out:] ‘This is a painful punishment.
Our Lord! Remove this punishment from us. Indeed we have believed!’
What will the admonition avail them, when a manifest apostle had already come to them,
but they turned away from him, and said, ‘A tutored madman?’
Indeed We will withdraw the punishment a little; but you will revert [to your earlier ways].
The day We shall strike with the most terrible striking, We will indeed take vengeance [on them].
Certainly We tried the people of Pharaoh before them, when a noble apostle came to them,
[saying,] ‘Give over the servants of Allah to me; indeed I am a trusted apostle [sent] to you.
Do not defy Allah. Indeed I bring you a manifest authority.
I seek the protection of my Lord and your Lord, lest you should stone me.
And if you do not believe me, keep out of my way.’
Then he invoked his Lord, [saying,] ‘These are indeed a guilty lot.’
[Allah told him,] ‘Set out by night with My servants; for you will be pursued.
Leave behind the sea unmoving; for they will be a drowned host.’
How many gardens and springs did they leave behind!
Fields and splendid places,
and the affluence wherein they rejoiced!
So it was; and We bequeathed them to another people.
So neither the sky wept for them, nor the earth; nor were they granted any respite.
Certainly We delivered the Children of Israel from the humiliating torment
of Pharaoh. Indeed, he was a tyrant among the transgressors.
Certainly We chose them knowingly above all the nations,
and We gave them some signs in which there was a manifest test.
These ones say,
‘It will be only our first death, and we shall not be resurrected.
Bring our fathers back [to life], if you are truthful.’
Are they better, or the people of Tubba‘, and those who were before them? We destroyed them; indeed, they were guilty.
We did not create the heavens and the earth and whatever is between them for play.
We did not create them except with consummate wisdom; but most of them do not know.
Indeed the Day of Judgement is the tryst for them all,
the day when a friend will not avail a friend in any way, nor will they be helped,
except for him on whom Allah has mercy. Indeed He is the All-mighty, the All-merciful.
Indeed the tree of Zaqqum
will be the food of the sinful.
Like molten copper it will boil in their bellies,
seething like boiling water.
[The keepers of hell will be told,] ‘Seize him and drag him to the middle of hell,
then pour over his head boiling water as punishment,
[and tell them,] “Taste this! Indeed you are the [self-styled] mighty and noble!
This is what you used to doubt!’
Indeed the Godwary will be in a safe place,
amid gardens and springs,
dressed in fine silk and brocade, sitting face to face.
So shall it be, and We shall wed them to black-eyed houris.
Secure [from any kind of harm,] there they will call for every kind of fruit [they wish].
Other than the first death, they will not taste death therein, and He will save them from the punishment of hell
—a grace from your Lord. That is the great success.
Indeed We have made it simple in your language, so that they may take admonition.
So wait! They [too] are waiting.
