Whatever there is in the heavens and the earth glorifies Allah. To Him belongs all sovereignty and to Him belongs all praise, and He has power over all things.
It is He who created you. Then some of you are faithless and some of you are faithful, and Allah watches what you do.
He created the heavens and the earth with consummate wisdom, and He formed you and perfected your forms, and toward Him is your destination.
He knows whatever there is in the heavens and the earth, and He knows whatever you hide and whatever you disclose, and Allah knows best what is in your breasts.
Has there not come to you the account of those who were faithless before? They tasted the evil consequence of their conduct, and there is a painful punishment for them.
That was because their apostles would bring them manifest proofs, but they said, ‘Will humans be our guides?!’ So they disbelieved and turned away, and Allah had no need [of their faith] and Allah is all-sufficient, all-laudable.
The faithless claim that they will not be resurrected. Say, ‘Yes, by my Lord, you will surely be resurrected; then you will surely be informed of what you did, and that is easy for Allah.’
So have faith in Allah and His Apostle and the light, which We have sent down, and Allah is well aware of what you do.
When He will you bring you together for the Day of Gathering, it will be a day of privation [and regret]. As for those who have faith in Allah and act righteously, He shall absolve them of their misdeeds and admit them into gardens with streams running in them, to remain in them forever. That is the great success.
But as for those who are faithless and deny Our signs, they will be the inmates of the Fire, to remain in it [forever], and it is an evil destination.
No affliction visits [anyone] except by Allah’s leave. Whoever has faith in Allah, He guides his heart, and Allah has knowledge of all things.
Obey Allah and obey the Apostle; but if you turn away, then Our Apostle’s duty is only to communicate in clear terms.
Allah—there is no god except Him—in Allah let all the faithful put their trust.
O you who have faith! Indeed, you have enemies among your spouses and children; so beware of them. Yet if you excuse, forbear, and forgive, then Allah is indeed all-forgiving, all-merciful.
Rather, your possessions, and children are a test, and Allah—with Him is a great reward!
So be wary of Allah, as much as you can, and listen and obey, and spend [in the way of Allah]; that is better for yourselves. Those who are saved from their own greed—it is they who are the felicitous.
If you lend Allah a good loan, He shall multiply it for you and forgive you, and Allah is all-appreciative, all-forbearing,
Knower of the sensible and the Unseen, the All-mighty, the All-wise.
