Blessed is He in whose hands is all sovereignty, and He has power over all things.
He, who created death and life that He may test you [to see] which of you is best in conduct. And He is the All-mighty, the All-forgiving.
He created seven heavens in layers. You do not see any discordance in the creation of the All-beneficent. Look again! Do you see any flaw?
Look again, once more. Your look will return to you humbled and weary.
We have certainly adorned the lowest heaven with lamps, and made them [the means of pelting] missiles against the devils, and We have prepared for them a punishment of the Blaze.
For those who defy their Lord is the punishment of hell, and it is an evil destination.
When they are thrown in it, they hear it blaring, as it seethes,
almost exploding with rage. Whenever a group is thrown in it, its keepers will ask them, ‘Did not any warner come to you?’
They will say, ‘Yes, a warner did come to us, but we impugned [him] and said, ‘Allah did not send down anything; you are only in great error.’
And they will say, ‘Had we listened or applied reason, we would not have been among inmates of the Blaze.’
Thus they will admit their sin. So away with the inmates of the Blaze!
Indeed for those who fear their Lord in secret there will be forgiveness and a great reward.
Speak secretly, or do so openly, indeed He knows well what is in the breasts.
Would He who has created not know? And He is the All-attentive, the All-aware.
It is He who made the earth tractable for you; so walk on its flanks and eat of His provision, and towards Him is the resurrection.
Are you secure that He who is in the sky will not make the earth swallow you while it quakes?
Are you secure that He who is in the sky will not unleash upon you a rain of stones? Soon you will know how My warning has been!
Certainly those who were before them had impugned [My apostles]; but then how was My rebuttal!
Have they not regarded the birds above them spreading and closing their wings? No one sustains them except the All-beneficent. Indeed, He watches all things.
Who is it that is your host who may help you, besides the All-beneficent? The faithless only dwell in delusion.
Who is it that may provide for you if He withholds His provision? Indeed, they persist in defiance and aversion.
Is he who walks prone on his face better guided, or he who walks upright on a straight path?
Say, ‘It is He who created you, and made for you hearing, eyesight, and hearts. Little do you thank.’
Say, ‘It is He who created you on the earth, and toward Him you will be mustered.’
They say, ‘When will this promise be fulfilled, if you are truthful?’
Say, ‘Its knowledge is only with Allah; I am only a manifest warner.’
When they see it brought near, the countenances of the faithless will be contorted, and [they will be] told, ‘This is what you were asking for!’
Say, ‘Tell me, whether Allah destroys me and those who are with me, or He has mercy on us, who will shelter the faithless from a painful punishment?’
Say, ‘He is the All-beneficent; we have faith in Him, and in Him do we trust. Soon you will know who is in manifest error.’
Say, ‘Tell me, should your water sink down [into the ground], who will bring you running water?’
