The Besieger!
What is the Besieger?!
What will show you what is the Besieger?!
Thamudand ‘Ad denied the Cataclysm.
As for Thamud, they were destroyed by the Cry.
And as for ‘Ad, they were destroyed by a fierce icy gale,
which He clamped on them for seven gruelling nights and eight days, so that you could see the people there lying about prostrate as if they were hollow trunks of palm trees.
So do you see any remaining trace of them?
Then Pharaoh and those who were before him, and the towns that were overturned, brought about iniquity.
They disobeyed the apostle of their Lord, so He seized them with a terrible seizing.
Indeed when the Flood rose high, We carried you in a floating ark,
that We might make it a reminder for you, and that receptive ears might remember it.
When the Trumpet is blown with a single blast
and the earth and the mountains are lifted and levelled with a single levelling,
then, on that day, will the Imminent [Hour] befall
and the sky will be split open—for it will be frail on that day—
with the angels all over it, and the Throne of your Lord will be borne that day by eight [angels].
That day you will be presented [before your Lord]: none of your secrets will remain hidden.
As for him who is given his book in his right hand, he will say, ‘Here, take and read my book!
Indeed I knew that I will encounter my account [of deeds].’
So he will have a pleasant life,
in an elevated garden,
whose clusters [of fruits] will be within easy reach.
[He will be told]: ‘Enjoy your food and drink, for what you had sent in advance in past days [for your future life].’
But as for him who is given his book in his left hand, he will say, ‘I wish I had not been given my book,
nor had I ever known what my account is!
I wish death had been the end of it all!
My wealth did not avail me.
My authority has left me.’
[The angels will be told:] ‘Seize him, and fetter him!
Then put him into hell.
Then bind him in a chain, seventy cubits in length.
Indeed he had no faith in Allah, the All-supreme,
and he did not urge the feeding of the needy,
so he has no friend here today,
nor any food except pus,
which no one shall eat except the iniquitous.’
I swear by what you see
and what you do not see:
it is indeed the speech of a noble apostle
and it is not the speech of a poet. Little is the faith that you have!
Nor is it the speech of a soothsayer. Little is the admonition that you take!
Gradually sent down from the Lord of all the worlds.
Had he faked any sayings in Our name,
We would have surely seized him by the right hand
and then cut off his aorta,
and none of you could have held Us off from him.
Indeed it is a reminder for the Godwary.
Indeed We know that there are some among you who deny [it].
And indeed it will be a [matter of] regret for the faithless.
It is indeed certain truth.
So celebrate the Name of your Lord, the All-supreme.
