Say, ‘It has been revealed to me that a team of the jinn listened [to the Quran] and they said, “Indeed we heard a wonderful Quran,
which guides to rectitude. Hence, we have believed in it and we will never ascribe any partner to our Lord.
Exalted be the majesty of our Lord; He has taken neither any spouse nor son.
The foolish ones among us used to speak atrocious lies concerning Allah.
We thought that humans and jinn would never utter any falsehood concerning Allah.
Indeed some persons from the humans would seek the protection of some persons from the jinn, thus only adding to their rebellion.
They thought, just as you think, that Allah will not raise anyone from the dead.
Indeed we made for the heaven and found it full of mighty sentries and flames.
We used to sit in its positions to eavesdrop, but anyone listening now finds a flame waiting for him.
We do not know whether ill is intended for those who are on the earth, or whether their Lord intends good for them.
Among us some are righteous and some are otherwise: we are various sects.
We know that we cannot frustrate Allah on the earth, nor can we frustrate Him by fleeing.
When we heard the [message of] guidance, we believed in it. Whoever that has faith in his Lord will fear neither privation nor oppression.
Among us some are Muslims and some of us are perverse.” ’ Those who submit [to Allah]—it is they who pursue rectitude.
As for the perverse, they will be firewood for hell.
If they are steadfast on the path [of Allah], We shall provide them with abundant water,
so that We may test them therein, and whoever turns away from the remembrance of his Lord, He will let him into an escalating punishment.
The places of worship belong to Allah, so do not invoke anyone along with Allah.
When the servant of Allah rose to pray to Him, they almost crowded around him.
Say, ‘I pray only to my Lord, and I do not ascribe any partner to Him.’
Say, ‘I have no power to bring you any harm or good [of my own accord].’
Say, ‘Neither can anyone shelter me from Allah, nor can I find any refuge besides Him.
[I have no duty] except to transmit from Allah, and [to communicate] His messages; and whoever disobeys Allah and His apostle, there will indeed be for him the fire of hell, to remain in it forever.’
When they see what they are promised, they will know who is weaker in supporters and fewer in numbers.
Say, ‘I do not know if what you are promised is near, or if my Lord has set a [long] term for it.’
Knower of the Unseen, He does not disclose His [knowledge of the] Unseen to anyone,
except to an apostle He approves of. Then He dispatches a sentinel before and behind him
so that He may ascertain that they have communicated the messages of their Lord, and He encompasses all that is with them, and He keeps an count of all things.
