O you wrapped up in your mantle!
Rise up and warn!
Magnify your Lord,
and purify your clothes,
and keep away from all impurity!
Do not grant a favour seeking a greater gain,
and be patient for the sake of your Lord.
When the Trumpet will be sounded,
that will be a day of hardship,
not at all easy for the faithless.
Leave Me [to deal] with him whom I created alone,
and furnished him with extensive means,
[gave him] sons to be at his side,
and facilitated [all matters] for him.
Still he is eager that I should give him more.
No indeed! He is an obstinate opponent of Our signs.
Soon I will overwhelm him with hardship.
Indeed he reflected and decided.
Perish he, how he decided!
Again, perish he, how he decided!
Then he looked;
then frowned and scowled.
Then he walked away disdainfully,
saying, ‘It is nothing but traditional sorcery.
It is nothing but the speech of a human.’
Soon I will cast him into Saqar.
And what will show you what is Saqar?
It neither spares, nor leaves [anything].
It burns the skin.
There are nineteen [keepers] over it.
We have assigned only angels as keepers of the Fire, and We have made their number merely a stumbling block for the faithless, and so that those who were given the Book may be reassured, and the faithful may increase in [their] faith, and so that those who were given the Book and the faithful may not be in doubt, and so that the faithless and those in whose hearts is a sickness may say, ‘What did Allah mean by this description?’ Thus does Allah lead astray whomever He wishes and guides whomever He wishes. No one knows the hosts of your Lord except Him, and it is just an admonition for all humans.
No indeed! By the Moon!
By the night when it recedes!
By the dawn when it brightens!
Indeed they are one of the greatest [signs of God]
—a warner to all humans,
[alike] for those of you who like to advance ahead and those who would remain behind.
Every soul is hostage to what it has earned,
except the People of the Right Hand.
[They will be] in gardens, questioning
the guilty:
‘What drew you into Hell?’
They will answer, ‘We were not among those who prayed.
Nor did we feed the poor.
We used to indulge in [profane] gossip along with the gossipers,
and we used to deny the Day of Retribution
until death came to us.’
So the intercession of the intercessors will not avail them.
What is the matter with them that they evade the Reminder
as if they were terrified asses
fleeing from a lion?
But everyone of them desires to be given unrolled scriptures [from Allah]!
No! Indeed, they do not fear the Hereafter.
No! It is indeed a reminder.
So let anyone who wishes be mindful of it.
And they will not be mindful unless Allah wishes. He is worthy of [your] being wary [of Him] and He is worthy to forgive.
