Has there been a period of time for man when he was not anything worthy of mention?
Indeed We created man from the drop of a mixed fluid so that We may put him to test, so We endowed with hearing and sight.
Indeed We have guided him to the way, be he grateful or ungrateful.
Indeed for the faithless We have prepared chains, iron collars, and a blaze.
Indeed the pious will drink from a cup seasoned with Kafur,
a spring where Allah’s servants will drink, making it gush forth as they please.
They fulfill their vows and fear a day whose ill will be widespread.
For the love of Him, they feed the needy, the orphan and the prisoner,
[saying,] ‘We feed you only for the sake of Allah. We desire no reward from you, nor thanks.
Indeed we fear a frowning and fateful day from our Lord.’
So Allah saved them from that day’s ills and graced them with freshness [on this faces] and joy [in their hearts].
He rewarded them for their patience with a garden and [garments of] silk,
reclining therein on couches, without facing any [scorching] sun, or [biting] cold.
Its shades will be close over them and its clusters [of fruits] will be hanging low.
They will be served around with vessels of silver and goblets of crystal
—crystal of silver— [from] which they will dispense in a precise measure.
They will be served therein with a cup of a drink seasoned with Zanjabeel,
from a spring in it named Salsabeel.
They will be waited upon by immortal youths, whom, were you to see them, you will suppose them to be scattered pearls.
As you look on, you will see there bliss and a great kingdom.
Upon them will be cloaks of green silk and brocade and they will be adorned with bracelets of silver. Their Lord will give them to drink a pure drink.
[They will be told]: ‘This is your reward, and your efforts have been well-appreciated.’
Indeed We have sent down to you the Quran in a gradual descent.
So submit patiently to the judgement of your Lord and do not obey any sinner or ingrate from among them,
and celebrate the Name of your Lord morning and evening,
and worship Him for a watch of the night and glorify Him the night long.
Indeed they love this transitory life, and disregard a heavy day that is ahead of them.
We created them and strengthened their joints, and We will replace them with others like them whenever We like.
This is indeed a reminder. So let anyone who wishes take the way toward his Lord.
But you will not wish unless it is willed by Allah. Indeed Allah is all-knowing, all-wise.
He admits whomever He wishes into His mercy, and He has prepared a painful punishment for the wrongdoers.
