Ta. Sin. Mim.
These are the verses of the illustrious Book.
You will perhaps kill yourself with anguish because they are not accepting the faith.
Had We wanted, We would have sent them a miracle from the sky to make their heads hang down in submission.
Whenever a new message comes to them from the Beneficent God, they turn away from it.
They have called (our revelation) lies. They will soon learn the consequences of what they mocked.
Have they not seen the earth in which We have made gracious plants grow?
In this there is, certainly, evidence (of the Truth). But most of them have no faith.
Your Lord is the Majestic and the All-merciful.
When Your Lord told Moses to go to the unjust people of the Pharaoh
and ask them, "Why do you not fear God?"
He replied, "Lord, I am afraid that they will call me a liar.
I feel nervous and my tongue is not fluent, so send Aaron with me.
They have charged me [with a crime] for which I am afraid they will kill me."
The Lord said, "Have no fear, both of you go with Our miracles. We shall closely listen to you."
They came to the Pharaoh and said, "We are the Messengerss of the Lord of the Universe.
Send the Israelites with us".
The Pharaoh said, "Did we not bring you up in our home as an infant and did you not live with us for many years
and you did the deed which you did. You are certainly ungrateful."
Moses said, "I did do it and I made a mistake.
Then I ran away from you in fear, but my Lord granted me the law and has appointed me as a Messenger.
And this is the favor with which you oblige me: You have made the Israelites your slaves.
The Pharaoh asked, "Who is the Lord of the Universe?"
Moses replied, "The Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, if you want to be certain".
The Pharaoh said to the people around him, "Did you hear that?"
Moses continued, "He is the Lord and the Lord of your forefathers."
The Pharaoh said, "The Messengers who has been sent to you is certainly insane".
Moses continued, "He is the Lord of the East and West and all that is between them, if only you would think".
Pharaoh said, "If you put forward any god other than me, I will surely put you in prison".
Moses asked, "What if I were to bring you clear proof (of the existence of God)?"
The Pharaoh replied, "Bring it, if you are telling the truth."
Moses threw his staff and suddenly it became a serpent.
Then he uncovered his hand and it was sheer white to the onlookers.
The Pharaoh said to the people around him, "He is certainly a skillful magician.
He wants to expel you from your land through his magic. What is your opinion?"
They said, "Hold him and his brother off for a while
and summon every skillful magician from all the cities."
So all the magicians gathered together
at the appointed time
and the people were asked, "Will you all be there so that we may follow the magicians if they become victorious?"
When the magicians came, they asked the Pharaoh, "Will there be any reward for us if we win?"
He replied, "You will then be my closest associates".
(Moses) asked the magicians, "Cast down what you want to".
So they cast down their ropes and staffs saying, "By the honor of the Pharaoh we shall certainly become the winners".
Then Moses cast down his staff and suddenly it swallowed up what they had falsely invented.
The magicians fell down in adoration
saying, "We believe in the Lord of the Universe
and the Lord of Moses and Aaron."
The Pharaoh said, "You believed without my permission? He seems to be your chief who has taught you magic. But you will soon know (the result of what you have done).
I shall certainly cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides and crucify you all together."
They said, "It does not matter. We shall be returning to our Lord.
We hope that our Lord will forgive us for our sins; we were not believers at first."
We sent a revelation to Moses telling him to leave with our servants during the night; they would be pursued (by the Pharaoh).
The Pharaoh sent word to all the cities saying,
"There is a small group of people
who have enraged us greatly.
We are warning all of you about them."
We deprived them (the unbelievers) of gardens, springs,
treasures, and graceful dwellings.
Thus we let the Israelites inherit them all.
The people of the Pharaoh pursued them at sunrise.
When the two groups came close to each other, the companions of Moses said, "We will be caught".
Moses said, "Certainly not. My Lord is with me and He will certainly guide me."
We sent a revelation to Moses saying, "Strike the sea with your staff." The sea was rent asunder and each side stood high up like a huge mountain.
Then We brought the two parties closer.
We saved Moses and all the people with him
and drowned the other party.
In this there was certainly evidence (of the Truth), but most of them did not have any faith.
Your Lord is certainly Majestic and All-merciful.
Tell them the story of Abraham,
when he asked his father and others, "What do you worship?"
They replied, "We worship idols and shall continue to worship them".
He asked them, "Can the idols hear you when you pray to them
or can they benefit or harm you?"
They said, "No, but our fathers worshipped them."
(Abraham) said, "Do you know that what you worship and what your grandfathers worshipped
are my enemies? Not so the Lord of the Universe.
He created me and He will guide me.
It is He who gives me food and drink
and heals me when I am sick.
He will cause me to die and will bring me back to life.
It is He whom I expect to forgive my sins on the Day of Judgment.
Lord, grant me authority. Join me to the righteous ones.
Make my words come true in the future.
Make me inherit the bountiful Paradise.
Forgive my father. He has gone astray.
Do not betray me
on the Day of Judgment when neither wealth nor children will be of any benefit
except what is done in obedience to God with a submissive heart.
On the Day of Judgment Paradise will be brought near
the pious and hell will be left open for the rebellious ones
who will be asked, "What did you worship
besides God? Will the idols help you? Can they help themselves?"
The idol worshippers, the idols, the rebellious ones,
and the army of satan will all be thrown headlong into hell.
"Quarrelling therein with each other,
they will say, "By God, we were in clear error
when we considered you equal to the Lord of the Universe.
Only the sinful ones made us go astray.
We have no one to intercede for us before God
nor a loving friend.
Would that we could have a chance to live again so that we might become believers."
In this there is evidence (of the truth), but many of them do not have any faith.
Your Lord is certainly Majestic and All-merciful.
The people of Noah rejected the Messengerss.
span class="col">Their brother Noah asked them, "Why do you not fear God?
I am a trustworthy Messengers sent to you.
Have fear of God and obey me.
I ask no payment from you for my preaching. The Lord of the Universe will give me my reward.
Have fear of God and obey me."
They said, "Should we believe in you when no one has followed you except the lowest ones".
(Noah) said, "I have no knowledge of their deeds.
If only you would realize, their account is with my Lord.
I do not drive away the believers.
I am only a Prophet.
They said, "Noah, if you do not desist, you will, certainly, be stoned to death."
Then Noah said, "Lord, my people have rejected me.
Judge among us and save me and the believers with me".
We saved him and those who were with him in a fully laden Ark,
and drowned the others.
In this there is evidence (of the truth) but most of them do not have any faith.
Your Lord is Majestic and All-merciful.
The tribe of Ad rejected the Messengers.
Their brother Hud asked them, "Why do you not have fear of God?
I am a trustworthy Messengers sent to you.
Have fear of God and obey me.
I do not ask for any payment for my preaching. I shall receive my reward from the Lord of the Universe.
"Do you build useless monuments on every mountain
and raise strong mansions as if you were to live forever?
When you attack, you attack as tyrants do.
Have fear of God and obey me.
Have fear of the One who has bestowed upon you all that you know.
He has given you cattle, children,
gardens, and springs.
I am afraid that you will suffer the torment of the Day of Judgment."
They said, "Whether you preach to us or not,
your preaching is nothing but ancient legends and we shall not face any torment".
They rejected him and We destroyed them.
In this there is evidence (of the Truth), yet most of them do not have any faith.
Your Lord is Majestic and All-merciful.
The tribe of Thamud rejected the Messengers.
Their brother Salih asked them, "Why do you not fear God?
I am a trustworthy Messengers sent to you.
Have fear of God and obey me.
I do not ask for any payment for my preaching. I shall receive my reward from the Lord of the Universe.
"Do you think that you will remain here peacefully forever
amidst the gardens, springs,
farms, and palm-trees in thick groves,
carving comfortable houses out of the mountains?
Have fear of God and obey me.
Do not obey the orders of the transgressors
who spread evil in the land with no reform."
They said, "You are only bewitched and insane.
You are a mere mortal like us. Show us a miracle if you are telling the Truth".
He said, "This is a she-camel. She will have her share of water as you have your share, each on a certain day.
Do not cause her to suffer lest you become subject to the torment of the great day (of Judgment)."
They slew the she-camel, but later became regretful
and torment struck them. In this there is evidence of the Truth, yet many people do not have any faith.
Your Lord is Majestic and All-merciful.
The people of Lot rejected the Messengers.
Their brother Lot asked them, "Why do you not have fear of God?
I am a trustworthy Messengers.
Have fear of God and obey me.
I do not ask any payment for my preaching. I shall receive my reward from the Lord of the Universe.
Do you, in the world, want to have carnal relations with males
instead of your wives, whom your Lord has created specially for you? You are a transgressing people."
They said, "Lot, if you do not give up preaching, you will certainly be expelled (from this town)".
He said, "I certainly hate what you practice.
Lord, save me and my family from their deeds."
We saved him and all of his family
except an old woman who remained behind.
We destroyed the others
by pouring upon them a terrible shower of rain. How evil was the rain for those who had been warned!
In this there is an evidence of the Truth, but many of them did not have any faith.
Your Lord is Majestic and All-merciful.
The dwellers of the forest also rejected the Messengers.
Shu'ayb asked them, "Why do you not have fear of God?
I am a trustworthy Messengers.
Have fear of God and obey me.
I do not ask any payment for my preaching. I shall receive my reward from the Lord of the Universe.
"Maintain just measure in your business and do not cause loss to others.
Weigh your goods with proper balance
and do not defraud people in their property or spread evil in the land.
Have fear of the One who has created you and the generations that lived before you."
They said, "You are no more than a bewitched and insane man
and a mere mortal like us. We think you are a liar.
Let a part of the sky fall on us if what you say is true".
He said, "My Lord knows all that you do."
They rejected him and then the torment of the gloomy day struck them. It was certainly a great torment.
In this there is an evidence of the Truth, but many of them did not have any faith.
Your Lord is Majestic and All-merciful.
This, (Quran), is certainly the revelation from the Lord of the Universe.
It has been revealed through the trustworthy Spirit
to your heart, so that you will warn (the people of the dangers of disobeying God).
It has been revealed in plain Arabic.
Its news was also mentioned in the ancient Books.
Is not the fact (that the Israelite scholars already knew about the Quran through their Book) sufficient evidence for the pagans of the truthfulness (of the Quran)?
Had We revealed it to a non-Arab
who would have read it to them, they (pagans) would not have believed in it.
Thus it passes through the hearts of the criminals.
They will not believe in it until they suffer the painful torment.
The torment will strike them suddenly without their knowledge.
They will say, "Can we be granted any respite?"
Do they want to hasten Our torment?
Do you not see that even if We give them respite for years
and then Our torment will strike them,
none of their luxuries will be able to save them from the torment?
We never destroyed any town without first sending to them warning and guidance.
We have never been unjust to anyone.
The satans have not revealed the Quran;
they are not supposed to do so. Nor do have they the ability for such a task.
The satans are barred from listening to anything from the heavens.
(Muhammad), do not worship anything besides God lest you suffer the punishment.
Warn your close relatives
and be kind to your believing followers.
If they disobey you, tell them, "I condemn your disobedient deeds".
Have trust in the Majestic and All-merciful God,
who can see whether you stand up
or move during your prostration with the worshippers.
He is All-hearing and All-knowing."
Should I tell you to whom the satans come?
They come to every sinful liar.
The satans try to listen to the heavens but many of them are liars.
Only the erring people follow the poets.
Have you not seen them wandering and bewildered in every valley
and preaching what they themselves never practice.
The righteously striving believers among them who remember God very often and use their talent to seek help after they have been wronged are the exceptional. The unjust will soon know how terrible their end will be.
