Alif. Lam. Mim.
The Romans have been defeated in a nearby land and after this defeat,
(within a few years) they will be victorious.
All matters of the past and future are in the hands of God. The believers will enjoy the help of God on that Day.
He helps whomever He wants. He is Majestic and All-merciful.
This is the promise of God. God does not ignore His promise, but many people do not know.
They only know the superficial realities of the worldly life and they are unaware of the life to come.
Have they not thought that God has not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them but for a genuine purpose to exist for an appointed term? Many people do not believe in their meeting with their Lord.
Have they not travelled through the land to see how terrible was the end of the people who lived before them. The people who lived before them were stronger than them in might, in tilling, and in developing the earth. Our Messengers came to them with clear miracles. God did not do an injustice to them but they wronged themselves.
The end of the evil-doers was terrible, for they had rejected the revelations of God and mocked them.
God begins the creation then causes it to turn back and to Him you will all return.
On the day when the Hour of Doom comes, the criminals will despair.
None of the idols will intercede for them and they will reject their idols.
When that day comes, (people) will be separated from one another.
The righteously striving believers will happily live in paradise.
However, the disbelievers, who called Our revelations and the Day of Judgment lies, will be brought into torment.
Glory belongs to God all the time, in the evening and in the morning.
To Him belongs all the thanks giving which takes place in the heavens and the earth, in the evenings and the noontime.
He brings forth the living from the dead, takes out the dead from the living, and revives the earth from its death. Thus, you will all be brought back to life again.
Some evidence of His existence are His creating you from clay and from that you became human beings scattered all around;
His creating spouses for you out of yourselves so that you might take comfort in them and His creating love and mercy among you. In this there is evidence (of the truth) for the people who (carefully) think.
Other evidence of His existence are the creation of the heavens and the earth and the differences of languages and colors. In this there is evidence (of the truth) for the worlds (mankind).
Your sleeping during the night and in the day your seeking His favors are evidence (of the truth) for the people who have hearing.
Also, of the evidence of His existence are His showing you lightening which gives you fear and hope and His sending water down from the sky which revives the earth after its death. In this there is evidence (of the truth) for the people of understanding.
Some other evidence of His existence is that both the heavens and the earth stand firm at His command. When He will call you from the earth, you will start to come out.
Everyone in the heavens and the earth belongs to Him and is subservient to Him.
It is He who begins the creation, then, turns it back. For Him this is very easy. All the exalted attributes in the heavens and the earth belong to Him. He is the Majestic and All-wise.
God has told you this parable about yourselves: Could your slaves share your wealth equally with you and could you fear them as you fear yourselves? Thus, do We clarify the evidence (of the truth) for the people of understanding.
In fact, the unjust have followed their desires without knowledge. Who will guide those whom God has caused to go astray? No one will be their helper.
(Muhammad), be devoted to the upright religion. It is harmonious with the nature which God has designed for people. The design of God cannot be altered. Thus is the upright religion, but many people do not know.
Turn in repentance to Him. Have fear of Him. Be steadfast in your prayer. Do not be like the pagans
who have divided themselves into various religious sects, each one happy with their own belief.
When people face hardship, they begin praying to their Lord and turn in repentance to Him. When they receive mercy from Him, a group of them begin to consider things equal to God,
because of their ingratitude for what We have given them. Let them enjoy themselves, but they will soon know (the consequences of their deeds).
Have We sent them any authority to speak in support of their idols?
When people receive mercy, they are happy with it. However, when hardship befalls them because of their own deeds, they despair.
Have they not seen how God increases the livelihood of whomever He wants and determines his share. In this there is evidence (of the truth) for the believing people.
Give the relatives, the destitute, and the needy travellers their share (of charity). It is better for those who want to please God and they will have everlasting happiness.
God will not allow to increase whatever illegal interest you try to receive in order to increase your wealth at the expense of people's property. Whatever amount of zakat you give to please God will be doubled (for you).
It is God who has created you and given you sustenance. He will make you die and will bring you back to life. Can any of your idols do such things? God is too Exalted to be considered equal to anything else.
Evil has spread over the land and the sea because of human deeds and through these God will cause some people to suffer so that perhaps they will return to Him.
(Muhammad), tell them, "Travel through the land to see how terrible was the end of those who lived before. Many of them were pagans.
Be devoted to the upright religion before the coming of the inevitable day when no one can escape from God and people will either be sent to Paradise or hell."
Those who disbelieve do so against their own souls. Those who do good pave the way for their own benefit.
God will reward the righteously striving believers through His favor. He does not love the unbelievers.
Some evidence of His existence is His sending the glad-news-bearing winds so that He would let you to receive His mercy, cause the ships to sail by His command, and let you seek His favor so that perhaps you would give Him thanks.
(Muhammad), We had sent before you Our Messengers to their people. The Messengers showed them clear miracles and We took revenge on the criminals. It was necessary for Us to help the believers.
It is God who sends the winds to raise the clouds. He spreads them in the sky as He wants, then He intensifies them, and then you can see the rain coming down from the cloud. When He sends it down upon whichever of His servants He wants, they rejoice
at the rainfall, though before that they had been in despair.
Look at the traces of the mercy of God, how He has revived the dead earth. God revives the dead; He has power over all things.
Even if We had sent the wind and caused (the plants) to turn yellow and to fade away, they would still have remained in disbelief.
You cannot make the dead listen, nor the deaf hear. Thus, they, (the disbelievers), turn away on their heels.
You cannot guide the straying blind. You can make no one listen except those who believe in Our revelations and are Muslims.
It is God who has created you weak, then, given you strength after your weakness and caused you to become weak and old after being strong. He creates whatever He wants. He is All-knowing and All-powerful.
On the day when the Hour of Doom comes, the criminals will swear that they have remained (in their graves) for no more than an hour. They had been inventing lies in this way.
Those who have received knowledge and have faith will say, "By the decree of God, you have remained for the exact period which was mentioned in the Book of God about the Day of Resurrection. This is the Day of Resurrection, but you did not know."
The excuses of the unjust on this day will be of no avail to them and they will not be able to please God.
We have told people various parables in this Quran. Even if you had shown them a miracle, the unbelievers would have said, "You are only the followers of falsehood".
Thus does God seal the hearts of those who do not know.
Be patient. The promise of God is certainly true. Let not the faithless make you despair of the promise of God.
