Alif. Lam. Mim.
These are the verses of the Book of wisdom.
A guidance and mercy for the righteous
people who are steadfast in prayer, pay the religious tax, and have firm belief in the life to come.
They follow the guidance of their Lord and they will have everlasting happiness.
(In an attempt to show that God's revelations are only ancient legends) some people pay for meaningless tales to draw others attention away from the Quran without knowledge and treat as a matter of fun. They will suffer a humiliating torment.
When Our revelations are recited to them, they turn back on their heels out of pride as if they did not hear them or their ears had been sealed off. Warn them of the painful torment.
The righteously striving believers will enter Paradise
wherein they will live forever. It is the true promise of God. He is Majestic and All-wise.
He has created the heavens without pillar as you can see, fixed the mountains on earth so that it may not shake you away, and settled therein all types of living creatures. We have sent down water from the sky and made all kinds of plants grow in gracious pairs.
This is the creation of God. Show me what those whom you consider equal to God have created. In fact, the unjust ones are in plain error.
We gave wisdom to Luqman so that he would give thanks to God. Those who give thanks to God do so for their own good. Those who are ungrateful should know that God is Self-sufficient and Praiseworthy.
Luqman advised his son telling him, "My son, do not consider anything equal to God, for it is the greatest injustice."
(Concerning his parents), We advised the man, whose mother bears him with great pain and breast-feeds him for two years, to give thanks to Me first and then to them, to Me all things proceed.
If they try to force you to consider things equal to Me, which you cannot justify, equal to Me, do not obey them. Maintain lawful relations with them in this world and follow the path of those who turn in repentance to Me. To Me you will all return and I shall tell you all that you have done.
"My son, God keeps the records of all the good and evil deeds, even if they are as small as a grain of mustard seed, hidden in a rock or in the heavens or the earth. God is subtle and All-aware.
My son, be steadfast in prayer. Make others do good. Prevent them from doing evil. Be patient in hardship. Patience comes from faith and determination.
Do not scornfully turn your face away from people. Do not walk around puffed-up with pride; God does not love arrogant and boastful people.
Be moderate in your walking and your talking. The most unpleasant sound is the braying of donkeys."
Have you not seen that God has made all that is in the heavens and the earth, subservient to you (human beings), and has extended and perfected for you His apparent and unseen bounties? Some people argue about God without knowledge, guidance, or an enlightening book.
When they are told to follow what God has revealed to them, they say, "We shall only follow our father's way of life." Will they follow it even if it is Satan who is calling them to the burning torment?
Whoever submits himself to the will of God in righteousness has certainly achieved a strong-hold. The end of all things is in the hands of God.
(Muhammad), do not let the disbelievers grieve you. To Us they will all return and We shall tell them all about what they have done. God knows best what is in everyone's hearts.
We shall allow them to enjoy themselves for a short while, then force them into severe torment.
If you ask them, "Who has created the heavens and the earth," they will certainly say, "God has created them." Say, "It is only God who deserves all praise, but most of them do not know".
To God belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth. He is Self-sufficient and Praiseworthy.
If all the trees in the earth were pens and the ocean, with seven more oceans, were ink still these could not suffice to record all the Words of God. God is Majestic and All-wise.
For God your creation and your resurrection are only like the creation and resurrection of one soul. God is All-hearing and All-seeing.
Have you not seen that God causes the night to enter into the day and the day into the night. He has made the sun and moon subservient (to Himself). Each moves (in an orbit) for an appointed time. God is certainly All-aware of what you do.
This is because God is the supreme Truth and whatever they worship besides Him is falsehood. God is the Most High and the Most Great.
Have you not seen that the ships sail in the ocean through the bounty of God so that He may show you the evidence (of His existence). There is evidence (of the truth) in this for every forbearing and grateful one.
When the waves cover them like shadows, they pray to God with sincerity in their religion, but when We bring them safely to land, only some of them follow the right path. No one rejects Our revelations except the treacherous ungrateful ones.
Mankind, have fear of your Lord and the day when a father will be of no avail to his son, nor will a son carry any part of the burden of his father. The promise of God is true. Do not let the worldly life deceive you nor let your pride deceive you about God.
Only God has the knowledge of the coming of the Hour of Doom. He sends down the rain and knows what is in the wombs. No soul is aware of what it will achieve tomorrow and no soul knows in which land it will die. God is All-knowing and All-aware.
