Alif. Lam. Mim.
There is no doubt that this Book is revealed by the Lord of the Universe.
Do they say that he, (Muhammad), has invented it? No, it is the truth from your Lord so that you will warn the people who have not received a warning before you. Perhaps they will seek guidance.
God is the one who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days, then He established His dominion over the Throne. No one besides Him is your guardian or intercessor. Will you then not take heed?
He sends the regulation of the affair from the heavens to the earth, then on the day which is equal to one thousand years of yours, it will ascend to Him.
He knows the unseen and the seen. He is Majestic and All-merciful.
It is He Who created everything in the best manner and began the creation of the human being from clay.
He made His offspring come into existence from an extract of insignificant fluid,
then He gave it proper shape and blew His spirit in it. He made ears, eyes and hearts for you, but you give Him very little thanks.
They have said, "How can we be brought to life again after we have been lost in the earth?" In fact, they have no faith in the Day of Judgment
(Muhammad), say, "The angel of death, who is appointed over everyone of you, will cause you to die and to your Lord you will all return."
Would that you could see (on the Day of Judgment) that criminals, with their heads hanging down before their Lord, saying, "Our Lord, we have seen and heard. Send us back to act righteously. Now we have strong faith".
Had We wanted, We could have given guidance to every soul, but My decree, that hell will be filled-up with jinn and people, has already been executed.
They will be told, "Suffer on this Day of Judgment. For your having ignored it, We have ignored you. Suffer everlasting torment for your evil deeds."
The only people who believe in Our revelations are those who, when reminded about them, bow down in prostration and glorify their Lord with His praise without pride.
Their sides give-up rest in beds in order to pray before their Lord in fear and hope. They spend for the cause of God out of what we have given them.
No soul knows what delight awaits them as the reward for their deeds.
Is a believer equal to an evil-doer? They are not equal at all.
The righteously striving believers will have Paradise for their dwelling as the reward of their good deeds.
However, the dwelling of the sinful ones will be hell fire. Each time they try to come out, they will be turned back with this remark, "Suffer the torment of the fire which you had called a lie".
We shall certainly make them suffer worldly torment before suffering the great torment so that perhaps they may return to Us.
Who are more unjust than those who are reminded of the revelation of their Lord, but have ignored them? We will take revenge on the criminal.
We gave the Book to Moses - do not have any doubt about the Day of Judgment - and made it a guide for the children of Israel.
We appointed some of the Israelites as leaders for their exercising patience to guide the others to Our commands. They had firm belief in Our revelations.
Your Lord will issue His decree about their (believers and disbeliever's) differences on the Day of Judgment.
Was it not a lesson for them, (the unbelievers), that We destroyed the many generations living before them among whose ruined dwellings they are now walking. In this there is many evidence (of the truth). Will they not then listen?
Have they not seen that We drive the water to the barren land and cause crops to grow which they and their cattle consume? Why, then, they will not see?
They say, "If what you say is true, when will the final triumph come?"
Say, "On the day of the final triumph, the faith of the disbelievers will be of no avail to them, nor will they be given any respite".
Turn away from them and wait. They are, also, waiting.
