Ha. Mim.
I swear by the illustrious Book.
that We have revealed the Quran on a blessed night to warn mankind.
On this night, every absolute command coming from Us becomes distinguishable.
The command that We have been sending
as a mercy (for the human being) from your Lord. Your Lord is All-hearing and All-knowing.
He is the Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, if only you would have strong faith.
There is only One Lord. It is He who gives life and causes things to die. He is your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers.
In fact, the unbelievers have doubts because of excessive involvement in worldly affairs.
Wait for the day (which will come before the Day of Judgment) when the sky will give out dense smoke
which will smother the people. They will say, "This is a painful torment.
Lord, remove this torment from us for we are believers".
How could this punishment bring them to their senses when a Messenger evidently had come to them,
and they turned away, saying, "He is a trained and insane person".
We shall remove the torment for a while but you will revert to your old ways.
However, We shall truly take Our revenge on the day when the great seizure takes place.
We had certainly tested the people of the Pharaoh before them to whom a noble Messengers had come, saying,
"Send the servants of God with me. I am a trustworthy Messenger sent to you.
Do not consider yourselves above God? I shall show you a manifest authority (in support of my truthfulness).
I seek protection from my Lord and your Lord from your decision of stoning me.
If you do not want to believe, leave me alone".
Moses addressed his Lord, saying, "Lord, these people are sinners".
We told him, "Leave the city with My servants during the night. You will be pursued.
Cross the sea by cutting a path through it. Pharaoh's army will be drowned.
How many were the gardens, springs,
corn-fields, gracious mansions,
and other bounties which they enjoyed yet left behind!
We gave these as an inheritance to other people.
The sky nor the earth cried for them, nor were they given respite.
We rescued the Israelites from the humiliating torment
and from the Pharaoh. He was the chief of the transgressors.
We gave preference to the Israelites over the other people with Our knowledge
and sent them revelations of which some were a clear trial for them.
These people say,
"After we die, we shall never be raised to life again.
Bring back to life our fathers if what you say is true".
Are they better than the tribe of Tubba (name of a Yemenite tribal chief) and those who lived before them? We destroyed them. They were criminals.
We have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them for Our own amusement.
We have created them for a genuine purpose, but most people do not know.
The appointed time for all of them will be the Day of Judgment
(when wrong will be distinguished from right). On this day friends will be of no benefit to one another, nor will they receive any help
except for those to whom God grants mercy. He is Majestic and All-merciful.
The tree of Zaqqum
is food for the sinner.
It will be like molted brass which will boil in the bellies
like water.
(It will be said of such sinners), "Seize them and drag them into the middle of hell.
Then pour unto their heads the boiling water to torment them".
They will be told, "Suffer the torment. You had thought yourselves to be majestic and honorable.
This is the torment that you persistently doubted".
The pious ones will be in a secure place
amid gardens and springs,
clothed in fine silk and rich brocade, sitting face to face with one another.
We shall unite them to maidens with big black and white lovely eyes.
They will be offered all kinds of fruits, in peace and security.
They will not experience any death other than that which they have already been through.
God will protect them from the torment of hell as a favor from your Lord. (Muhammad), this is certainly the greatest triumph.
We have made the Quran easy for you to recite so that perhaps they may take heed.
Wait (for God's decree) and they too will be waiting.
