Believers, do not be presumptuous with the Messenger of God (in your deeds and in your words). Have fear of God; He is All-hearing and All-knowing.
Believers, do not raise your voices above the voice of the Prophet, do not be too loud in speaking to him [as you may have been to one another], lest your deeds will be made devoid of all virtue without your realizing it.
The hearts of those who lower their voices in the presence of the Messenger of God are tested by God through piety. They will have forgiveness and a great reward.
Most of those who call you from behind the private chambers do not have any understanding.
Had they exercised patience until you had come out, it would have been better for them. God is All-forgiving and All-merciful.
Believers, if one who publicly commits sins brings you any news, ascertain its truthfulness carefully, lest you harm people through ignorance and then regret what you have done.
Know that the Messenger of God is with you. Had he yielded to you on many of the matters, you would have been in great trouble. But God has endeared the faith to you and has made it attractive to your hearts. He has made disbelief, evil deeds and disobedience hateful to you. Such people will have the right guidance
as a favor and a blessing from God. God is All-knowing and All-wise.
If two parties among the believers start to fight against each other, restore peace among them. If one party rebels against the other, fight against the rebellious one until he surrenders to the command of God. When he does so, restore peace among them with justice and equality; God loves those who maintain justice.
Believers are each other's brothers. Restore peace among your brothers. Have fear of God so that perhaps you will receive mercy.
Believers, let not a group of you mock another. Perhaps they are better than you. Let not women mock each other; perhaps one is better than the other. Let not one of you find faults in another nor let anyone of you defame another. How terrible is the defamation after having true faith. Those who do not repent are certainly unjust.
Believers, stay away from conjecture; acting upon some conjecture may lead to sin. Do not spy on one another or back-bite. Would any of you like to eat the disgusting dead flesh of your brother? Have fear of God; God accepts repentance and is All-merciful.
People, We have created you all male and female and have made you nations and tribes so that you would recognize each other. The most honorable among you in the sight of God is the most pious of you. God is All-knowing and All-aware.
The bedouin Arabs have said, "We are believers." Tell them, "You are not believers, but you should say that you are Muslims. In fact, belief has not yet entered your hearts. If you obey God and His Messenger, nothing will be reduced from your deeds. God is All-forgiving and All-merciful.
The believers are those who believe in God and His Messenger, who do not change their belief into doubt and who strive hard for the cause of God with their property and persons. They are the truthful ones".
(Muhammad), say, "Do you teach God about your religion? God knows whatever is in the heavens and the earth. He has the knowledge of all things".
(The bedouins tell you that) you owe them (a great deal) for their embracing Islam. Tell them, "You are not doing me any favors by embracing Islam. In fact, it is God who has done you a great favor by guiding you to the faith. (Think about this) if you are people of truth.
God knows whatever is unseen in the heavens and in the earth. He is Well Aware of what you do".
