By Qaf and the glorious Quran, (you are the Messenger of God).
In fact, it seems odd (to the pagans) that a warner from their own people has come to them. The disbelievers have said, "It is very strange
that after we die and become dust, we shall be brought back to life again. This seems far from reality".
We already know how much of them (of their bodies) the earth will consume. With Us there is a Book that contains all records.
In fact, they have rejected the truth that has come to them, thus, they live in confusion.
Have they not seen how We have established the sky above them and decked it without gaps and cracks?
(Have they not seen) how We have spread out the earth, placed on it firm mountains and have made all kinds of flourishing pairs of plants grow?
This is a reminder and it sharpens the insight of every servant of God who turns to Him in repentance.
We have sent blessed water down from the sky to grow gardens, harvestable crops
and tall palm-trees with clusters of dates
as sustenance for My servants. With this We have brought the dead land back to life. Thus, will also be your resurrection.
The people of Noah, dwellers of the Ra's, Thamud,
Ad, the Pharaoh, Lot,
dwellers of the forest, and the people of Tubba had all rejected the Prophets. Thus, they became subject to Our torment.
Did We fail to accomplish the first creation? Of course, We did not; We have all power over all things. Yet they are confused about a new creation.
We swear that We have created the human being and We know what his soul whispers to him. We are closer to him than even his jugular vein.
Since the two scribes are sitting on each of his shoulders, he does not utter a word which is not recorded immediately by the watchful scribes.
The human being will certainly experience the agony of death
and (the human being will be told), "This is what you had been trying to run away from".
The trumpet will certainly be sounded. This will be the day (about which you) were threatened.
Every soul will be accompanied (by an angel) behind him and another as a witness.
(He will be told), "You were completely heedless of this day. We have removed the veil from your eyes and your vision will now be sharp and strong".
His (angelic) companion will say, "(Lord), the record of his deeds is with me and is all ready".
(They will be told,) "Throw into hell every persistent disbelievers,
who is an opponent of good, a suspicious transgressor
and an idol worshipper. Throw him into severe torment".
His satanic companion will say, "Our Lord, I did not mislead him, but he himself went astray".
The Lord will say, "Do not argue in My presence; I had certainly sent you a warning.
No word is to be exchanged in My presence. I am not unjust to My servants".
On that day We shall ask hell, "Are you full?" It will say, "Are there any more?"
Paradise will be brought near for the pious ones
(and they will be told), "This is what you were promised. It is for everyone who turned in repentance to God, kept his promise,
feared the Beneficent God in secret, and turned to Him with a repenting heart".
(They will be told), "Enter Paradise in peace and, therein, you will live forever".
They will have therein whatever they want and will receive from Us more rewards
How many an ancient town who were much stronger than them (unbelievers) did We destroy. (In vain), they wandered through the land in search of a place of refuge from Our torment.
This is a reminder for everyone who understands, listens, and sees.
We created the heavens, the earth, and all that is between them in six days without experiencing any fatigue.
(Muhammad), exercise patience against what they say. Glorify your Lord with His praise before sunrise and sunset.
Glorify Him during the night and also glorify Him after prostration.
Wait for the day when the trumpet will be sounded from a nearby place.
On that day they will certainly hear the sound of the trumpet and that will be the Day of Resurrection.
We give life and cause things to die. To Us all things will return.
On the day when the earth is rent asunder, they will quickly come out of their graves. This is how easy it is for Us to bring about the Day of Resurrection.
We know best what they say and you cannot compel them. Remind, by way of the Quran, those who have fear of My warnings.
