By the winds which carry dust particles,
by the clouds which are heavily loaded with water,
by the ships which smoothly sail on the oceans,
by the angels which distribute the affairs,
that what you are promised is certainly true
and the Day of Judgment will inevitably take place.
By the beautiful heavens,
your ideas are confused.
Let whoever wishes, turn away from Our Quran.
Death to those whose opinions are merely baseless conjectures.
and who wander in the abyss of confusion.
They ask, "When it will be the Day of Judgment?"
On the Day of Judgment they will be punished by the fire
and will be told, "Suffer the torment which you wanted to experience immediately".
The pious ones will live amidst gardens and springs,
receiving their reward from their Lord. They had been righteous people before the Day of Judgment.
They slept very little during the night
and asked for forgiveness in the early morning.
They assigned a share of their property for the needy and the destitute.
In the earth there is evidence (of the Truth) for those who have strong faith.
There is also evidence of the Truth within your own selves. Will you then not see?
In the heavens there is your sustenance and that which you were promised (Paradise).
This, by the Lord of the heavens and the earth is as certain as your ability to speak.
Have you heard the story of the honorable guests of Abraham?
When they came to him saying, "Peace be with you," he replied to their greeting in the same manner and said to himself, "These are a strange people".
He went quietly to his wife and returned to his guests with a fat, roasted calf.
He placed it before them. Then he said, "Why are you not eating?"
He began to feel afraid. They said, "Do not be afraid," and then gave him the glad news of the birth of a knowledgeable son.
His wife came forward, crying and beating her face, saying, "I am an old barren woman!"
They said, "This is true but your Lord has said, (that you will have a son); He is All-wise and All-knowing".
Abraham asked, "Messengers, what is your task?"
They replied, "We have been sent to a sinful people
to bring down upon them showers of marked lumps of clayy.
They are transgressors in the presence of your Lord".
We saved the believers among them,
but We found only one Muslim house.
We left therein evidence for those who fear the painful torment.
There is also evidence (of the Truth) in the story of Moses when We sent him to the Pharaoh with clear authority.
The Pharaoh and his forces turned away from him, saying, "He is either a magician or an insane person".
We seized him and his army and threw them into the sea. He himself was to be blamed.
There is also evidence of the Truth in the story of Ad whom We struck with a violent wind
which turned everything it approached into dust.
There is also evidence (of the Truth) in the story of the Thamud, who were told to enjoy themselves for an appointed time.
They transgressed against the command of their Lord. So a blast of sound struck them and they were unable to do anything but stare.
They were unable to stand up, nor were they helped.
The people of Noah who lived before them were also evil doing people.
We have made the heavens with Our own hands and We expanded it.
We have spread out the earth and how brilliantly it is spread!
We have created everything in pairs so that perhaps you may take heed.
(Muhammad), tell them,"Seek refuge in God. I have been sent from Him to plainly warn you.
Do not choose other gods besides Him. I have been sent from Him to plainly warn you".
In the same way no Messenger came to those who lived before them without his people calling him a magician or an insane person.
Have they inherited such dealings with the Prophets from their predecessors or are they a rebellious people?
(Muhammad), leave them alone and you will not be blamed.
Keep on reminding them. This benefits the believers.
We have created jinn and human beings only that they might worship Me.
I do not expect to receive any sustenance from them or that they should feed Me.
It is God Who is the Sustainer and the Lord of invincible strength.
The unjust will bear a burden like that of their unjust predecessors. Let them not make Me bring immediate punishment upon them.
Woe to the disbelievers when the day with which they have been threatened comes!
