By the Mount (Sinai),
by the book (Torah) written
on parchment for distribution,
by the established House (Mecca),
by the high ceiling (heaven),
and by the swelling ocean,
the torment of your Lord will inevitably take place
and no one will be able to prevent it.
On the day when the heavens will swiftly fly
and the mountains quickly move.
Woe will be to those who rejected the Truth
and who indulged in false disputes against (God's revelations).
On that day they will be violently pushed into the fire
and they will be told, "This is the fire which you called a lie.
Is it magic or do you not still see?
Burn in its heat. It is all the same for you whether you exercise patience or not; This is the recompense for your deeds".
The pious will live in bountiful Paradise,
talking of what they have received from their Lord and of how their Lord has saved them from the torment of hell.
They will be told, "Eat and drink to your heart's delight for what you have done".
They will recline on couches arranged in rows and We shall couple them with maidens with large, lovely eyes.
The offspring of the believers will also follow them to Paradise. So shall We join their offspring to them because of their faith. We shall reduce nothing from their deeds. Everyone will be responsible for his own actions.
We shall provide them with fruits and the meat of the kind which they desire.
They will pass cups of un-intoxicating and unsinful wine to one another.
They will be served by youths who will be as beautiful as pearls.
They will turn to one another ask questions,
saying, "We were afraid while in the world.
But God has granted us favors and saved us from the scorching heat of the torment.
We had prayed to Him; He is Kind and All-merciful".
(Muhammad), remind them, by the Grace of your Lord, that you are neither a soothsayer or an insane person.
Do they say, "He is only a poet and we are waiting to see him die!?"
Say, "Wait, I too am waiting with you".
Does their reason tell them to say this or is it because they are a rebellious people?
Do they say, "He has falsely invented it (the Quran)?" In fact, they themselves have no faith.
Let them produce a discourse like it if they are true in their claim.
Have they been created from nothing or are they themselves their own creators?
Have they created the heavens and the earth? In fact, they have no strong faith.
Do they own the treasures of your Lord? Have they any authority over God?
Do they have a ladder (by which they can climb up to the heavens) and listen (to the angels) and come back to the rest of the people with clear authority?
Do the daughters belong to Him and the sons to you?
Do you (Muhammad) ask them for any payment (for your preaching) which they cannot afford?
Do they have knowledge of the unseen, thus, are able to predict (the future)?
Do they design evil plans? The disbelievers themselves will be snared by their evil plots.
Do they have another god besides God? God is too exalted to be considered equal to the idols.
Even if they were to see a part of the heavens falling down upon them, they would say, "It is only dense cloud".
So leave them alone until they face the day when they will be struck dead from terror
and when their evil plans will be of no benefit to them nor will they be helped.
The unjust will suffer other torments besides this but most of them do not know.
Wait patiently for the command of your Lord. We are watching over you. Glorify your Lord when you rise during the night
and glorify Him after the setting of the stars.
