All that is in the heavens and the earth glorify God. He is the Majestic and All-wise.
It is He who drove the disbelievers among the followers of the Bible out of their homes (in the Arabian Peninsula) as the first time exiles. You did not think that they would leave their homes and they thought that their fortresses would save them from God. The decree of God came upon them in a way that even they did not expect. He caused such terror to enter their hearts that they started to destroy their own homes by their own hands and by those of the believers. People of vision, learn from this a lesson.
Had God not decreed exile for them, He would have certainly punished them (in some other way). In this life and in the next life they would have suffered the torment of hell fire.
This is because they opposed God and His Messenger and whoever opposes God should know that God's retribution is severe.
All the productive palm-trees (of the Jews hostile to you) which you cut down or left untouched were the will of God to bring disgrace upon the evil-doers.
Since you did not have to exhaust your horses and camels or (even fight), God granted to His Messenger their property. God gives authority to His Messenger over whomever He wants. God has power over all things.
Whatever God grants to His Messenger (out of the property) of the people of the towns, belongs to God, the Messenger, the kinsfolk, the orphans, the destitute and to those who may become needy while on a journey, so that it will not circulate only in the hands of rich ones among them. Take only what the Messenger gives to you and desist from what he forbids you. Have fear of God; God is severe in His retribution.
The poor immigrants who were deprived of their homes and property, who seek favors and pleasures from God, and help Him and His Messenger will also have (a share in the said property). These people are the truthful ones.
Those who established a community center and embraced the faith before the arrival of the immigrants love those who have come to their town. They are not jealous of what is given to the immigrants. They give preference to them over themselves - even concerning the things that they themselves urgently need. Whoever controls his greed will have everlasting happiness.
Those who migrated later (to Medina) say, "Lord, forgive us and our brothers who preceded us in the faith, and clear our hearts of any ill will against the believers. Lord, You are Compassionate and All-merciful".
Have you not seen the hypocrites who say to their disbelieving brothers among the People of the Book, "If you are driven out, we shall, also, leave the town with you and we shall never obey whoever seeks to harm you. If you are attacked, we shall help you." God testifies that they are liars.
If they were to be expelled, they would not go with them. If they were to be attacked they would not help them. Even if they were to help them, they would run away from the battle and leave them helpless.
They are more afraid of you than of God. They are a people who lack understanding.
They will not fight you united except with the protection of fortified towns or from behind walls. They are strong among themselves. You think that they are united, but in fact, their hearts are divided. They are a people who have no understanding.
They are like those who, a short time before, suffered the consequences of their deeds. They, too, will suffer a painful torment.
They are like satan who said to people, "Reject the faith," but when the people rejected the faith he said, "I have nothing to do with you. I fear the Lord of the Universe".
The fate of both of them will be hell fire wherein they will live forever. Thus will be the recompense for the unjust.
Believers, have fear of God. A soul must see what it has done for the future. Have fear of God for He is All-aware of what you do.
Do not be like those who forget about God. He will make them forget themselves. These are the sinful people.
The Companions of the Fire and the Companions of the Garden are not equal. The Companions of the Garden will achieve felicity.
The people of Paradise and hell are not alike; the people of Paradise are the successful ones. Had We sent down this Quran on a mountain, you would have seen it humbled and rent asunder for fear of God. These are parables which We tell to people so that perhaps they will think.
He is God, the only Lord, Who knows the unseen and the seen. He is the Beneficent and All-merciful One.
He is the only Lord, the King, the Holy, the Peace, the Forgiver, the Watchful Guardian, the Majestic, the Dominant, and the Exalted. God is too exalted to have any partner.
He is the Creator, the Designer, the Modeler, and to Him belong all virtuous names. All that is in the heavens and the earth glorify Him. He is All-majestic and All-wise.
