The Inevitable! (Day of Judgment).
What is the Inevitable?
Would that you knew (in detail) what the Inevitable is!
The people of Thamud and Ad denied the Day of Judgment.
The Thamuds were destroyed by a violent blast of sound.
The Ads were destroyed by a swift, destructive gale
which continued to strike them for seven and eight days so that eventually you could see the people lying dead like the hollow trunks of uprooted palm-trees.
Can you see any of their survivors?
The Pharaoh, those who lived before him and the people of the Subverted Cities all persisted in doing evil.
They disobeyed the Messenger of their Lord and He seized them with torment which increased with time.
When the flood rose high and covered the whole land, We carried you in the Ark.
as a lesson for you, but only attentive ears will retain it.
With the first blast of sound from the trumpet,
the earth and mountains will be raised up high and crushed all together.
On that day, the inevitable event will take place
and the heavens will be rent asunder,
and will turn frail, losing all force. The angels will be around the heavens and on that day eight of them will carry the Throne of your Lord above all the creatures.
On that day all your secrets will be exposed.
Those who will receive the books of the records of their deeds in their right hands will say, "Come and read my record.
I was sure that the record of my deeds would be shown to me".
They will have a pleasant life
in an exalted garden
with fruits within easy reach.
Such people will be told, "Eat and drink with pleasure as the reward for what you did in the past".
However, those who will receive the books of the records of their deeds in their left hands will say, "We wish that this record had never been given to us
and that we would never knew what our records contained.
Would that death had taken us away for good.
Our wealth is of no benefit to us
and our belief has destroyed us".
The angels will be told, "Seize and chain them,
then throw them into hell to be heated up therein.
Fasten a chain to them - seventy cubits long -
they did not believe in the great God,
nor were they concerned with feeding the destitute.
On this day, they will have no friends
and no food except pus
which only the sinners eat".
I do not need to swear by what you see
and what you do not see
because the Quran is certainly the word of a reverent messenger.
It is not the word of a poet but only a few of you have faith,
nor is it the work of a soothsayer but only a few of you take heed.
It is a revelation from the Lord of the Universe.
Had Muhammad invented some words against Us,.
We would have caught hold of him by his right hand
and cut-off his main artery.
None of you would be able to prevent Us from doing this to him.
The Quran is certainly a reminder for the pious ones.
We certainly know that some of you have rejected it
and (on the Day of Judgment) this will be a great source of regret for the unbelievers.
This is the Truth beyond any doubt.
(Muhammad), glorify the name of your Lord, the Great One.
