Someone has (needlessly) demanded to experience the torment (of God),
which will inevitably seize the disbelievers.
No one can defend him against God, the Lord of the exalted positions.
On that Day (of Judgment), long as fifty thousand years, the angels and the Spirit will ascend to Him.
(Muhammad), exercise patience with no complaints.
They think that it (the Day of Judgment) is far away.
but We see it to be very near.
On the day when the heavens become like molten metal.
and the mountains become like wool,
even intimate friends will not inquire about their friends,
though they may see each other. A sinner will wish that he could save himself from the torment of that day by sacrificing his children,
his wife, his brother,
his kinsmen who gave him refuge (from hardship)
and all those on earth.
By no means! For the raging flames of the fire
will strip-off the flesh
and drag into it anyone who has turned away (from obeying God),
and who accumulated wealth without spending it for a good purpose.
Human beings are created greedy.
When they are afflicted, they complain,
but when they are fortunate, they become niggardly
except those who are steadfast
and constant in their prayers.
They are those who assign a certain share of their property
for the needy and the deprived,
who acknowledge the Day of Judgment,
who are afraid of the torment of their Lord,
the punishment of their Lord is not something for them to feel secure of,
who guard their carnal desires
except from their wives and slave girls, in which case they are not to be blamed,
but whoever goes beyond this is a transgressor;
who honor their trust and promises,
who testify to what they have witnessed,
and (finally) those who do not miss their ritual - prayers at the prescribed times;
such people will receive due honor in Paradise.
What is wrong with the disbelievers who roam around you (Muhammad),
left and right, in numerous groups?
Does every one of them desire to enter the bountiful Paradise?
By no means! For they know very well out of what We have created them (The human being's naturally growing from a living germ, without discipline and good deeds will not result in virtue).
I do not need to swear by the Lord of the eastern and western regions that We have certainly all the power
to replace them by a better people and none can challenge Our power.
(Muhammad), leave them alone to dispute and play until they face the Day with which they have been threatened:
the Day when they rush out of their graves as if racing towards a signpost,
with their eyes cast down and covered by disgrace; the day about which they were promised.
