(Muhammad), say, "It has been revealed to me that a party of jinn has listened (to the recitation) of the Quran and has told (their people), "We heard an amazing reading
which guides people to the right path and we believe in it. We shall never consider anyone equal to our Lord;
our Lord is too exalted to have either a wife or son.
The dimwit one (the devil) among us has been telling confused lies about God.
We thought that no man or jinn could ever tell lies about God.
"Certain human beings sought refuge with certain jinn and this increased the rebelliousness of those jinn.
Those people thought, like you, that God would never send down a Messenger.
"We went near the heavens but found it to be full of strong guards and shooting flames.
We used to sit near by and try to listen to the heavens, but shooting flames now await those who try to do that.
We do not know whether by this arrangement God intends benefit and guidance for the people of the earth or only evil.
As for us, some of us are righteous and others are not. We have all followed different ways.
We knew that we could never challenge God whether we stayed on earth or fled elsewhere.
Now that we have listened to the guidance, we believe in it. Whoever believes in his Lord does not need to fear loss or oppression.
Some of us are Muslims and some of us have deviated from the Truth. Whoever has embraced Islam has followed the right guidance.
However, the deviators from the Truth will be the fuel for hell".
Had they (jinn and mankind) remained steadfast in their religion (Islam), We would certainly have given them abundant water to drink
as a trial for them. God will make those who disregard the guidance from their Lord suffer increasing torment.
All the parts of the body to be placed on the ground during prostration belong to God.
Do not prostrate before anyone other than Him. When the servant of God (Muhammad) preached (his message) the jinn would all crowd around him.
(Muhammad), say, "I worship only my Lord and do not consider anyone equal to Him".
Say, "I do not possess any power to harm or benefit you".
Say, "No one can protect me from God, nor can I find any place of refuge but with him.
My only (means of protection) is to convey the message of God. Whoever disobeys God and His Messenger will go to hell, wherein he will live forever".
(On the Day of Judgment) when the disbelievers witness that with which they have been threatened, they will then know whose helpers are weaker and fewer in number.
(Muhammad), say, "I do not know whether that with which you have been threatened is close by or whether my Lord will prolong the time of its coming.
He knows the unseen and He does not allow anyone to know His secrets except those of His Messengers whom He chooses.
He causes angelic guards to march before and after him.
(Messenger) so that He would know that the Messengers have conveyed the message of their Lord. He encompasses all that is with them and He keeps a precise account of all things".
