I swear by the Day of Resurrection
and by the self accusing soul (that you will certainly be resurrected).
Do men think that We shall never be able to assemble their bones?
We certainly have the power to restore them even the very tips of their finger.
In fact, people want to have eternal life in this world.
He asks, "When will be the Day of Judgment?"
When the eye is bewildered,
the moon eclipsed.
and the sun and the moon are brought together,
people will say, "Is there anywhere to run away?"
Certainly not! There will be no place of refuge.
The only place of refuge will be with God.
On that day, people will be informed of all that they had done and all that they were supposed to do.
In fact, people are well-aware of their own soul
even though they make excuses.
(Muhammad), do not move your tongue too quickly to recite the Quran.
We shall be responsible for its collection and its recitation.
When We recite it, follow its recitation (by Us).
We shall be responsible for its explanation.
Human beings certainly do not want to pay much attention to the Quran. In fact, they love the worldly life
and neglect the life to come.
On the Day of Judgment some faces will be bright,
and look forward to receiving mercy from their Lord.
Others will be despondent,
certain of facing a great calamity.
Some people, certainly, do not believe in it, but when a person's soul reaches up to his throat
and the angels say, "Who will take away his soul,
(the angels of mercy or the angels of wrath,)" then, he will realize that it is time to leave this world.
When legs are twisted around each other,
that will be the time to be driven to one's Lord.
The human being does not want to believe the Truth, nor does he want to pray.
He rejects the faith, turns away
and haughtily goes to his people.
Woe to you!
Woe to you!
For you, the human being of such behavior, will certainly deserve it.
Does the human being think that he will be left uncontrolled?
Was he not once just a drop of discharged sperm.
Was he not turned into a clot of blood? God then formed him and gave him proper shape. From the human being, God made males and females in pairs.
Does He then not have the power to bring the dead back to life?
