There was certainly a time when there was no mention of the human being.
We created the human being from the union of sperm and egg to test him. We gave him hearing and vision.
We showed him the right path whether he would be grateful or ungrateful.
We have prepared chains, shackles, and flaming fire (for the disbelievers).
The virtuous ones will drink from a cup containing camphor
which flows from a spring from which the servants of God will drink.
The servants of God fulfill their vows and are afraid of the day in which there will be widespread terror.
They feed the destitute, orphans, and captives for the love of God, saying,
"We only feed you for the sake of God and we do not want any reward or thanks from you.
We are afraid of our Lord and the bitterly distressful day".
God will certainly rescue them from the terror of that day and will meet them with joy and pleasure.
For their patience, He will reward them with Paradise and silk.
They will recline therein on couches and they will find neither excessive heat nor cold.
The shades of the garden will be closely spread over them and it will be easy for them to reach the fruits.
They will be served with silver dishes and crystal clear goblets.
Also there will be crystal clear goblets of silver containing the exact measure of drink which they desire.
They will drink cups containing (soft flowing) sparkling water
from a spring named salsabil.
They will be served by immortal youths who look like scattered pearls.
If you were to see it, you would find it to be a great kingdom with great bounty.
They will have fine green silk and brocade, and they will be decked with bracelets of silver. Their Lord will provide them with a drink of pure wine.
This will be their reward and their efforts will be appreciated.
(Muhammad), We have revealed the Quran to you in gradual steps.
So wait patiently for the command of your Lord and do not yield to any sinful or disbelieving person among them (people).
Mention the Name of your Lord, mornings and evenings.
Prostrate before Him and glorify Him extensively during the night.
These people (disbelievers) love the worldly life and neglect the terrifying day which will come.
We have created them and have given them strength. Had We wanted, We could have replaced them with another people like them.
This chapter is a reminder. Let those who want, seek guidance from their Lord.
(The virtuous mentioned in this chapter) want only what God wants. God is All-knowing and All-wise.
He admits to His mercy whomever He wants. For the unjust He has prepared a painful punishment.
