By (the angels) sent forth with the commands of God,
by (the angels) as swift as blowing winds,
by (the angels) spreading (the words of God) far and wide,
by (the angels) who make a clear distinction between right and wrong
and by those who reveal revelations (to the prophets)
to provide excuses for some and to give warnings to others:
that whatever with which you have been warned will inevitably come to pass.
Then the stars will lose their light.
Heavens will rent asunder.
The mountains will be blown away as dust.
The Messengers will receive their appointments.
If one asks, "To which day have such calamitous events been postponed?"
one will be told,"To the Day of Distinction".
Would that you knew about the Day of Judgment!
On that day, woe will be to those who have rejected God's revelations!
Did We not destroy the ancient people
and make others settle after them in their land?
Thus do We deal with the sinful ones.
On that day, woe upon those who have rejected God's revelations!
Did We not create you from an insignificant drop of fluid
and place it in a secure place
for an appointed time?
Thus did We Plan and how excellent is Our planning!
On that day, woe would be upon those who have rejected the revelations of God!
Did We not make the earth as a gathering place
for the living and the dead,
place on it high mountains and provide you with fresh water?
On that Day (of Judgment) woe would be upon those who have rejected God's revelations!
Proceed to that (the Day of Judgment) which you have rejected.
Proceed to that shadow, rising in three columns
which neither gives shade nor protects one from the flames.
The fire will shoot out sparks as big as huge towers
and yellow camels.
On that day, woe would be upon those who have rejected God's revelations!
On that day they will not be able to speak,
nor will they be permitted to offer any excuses.
On that day, woe would be those who have rejected God's revelations!
That is the Day of Judgment. We will bring you together with all the ancient peoples.
If you have any plans, use them.
On that day, woe would be upon those who have rejected God's revelations!
The pious ones will rest amid the shade, springs,
and fruits of the kind which they desire.
(They will be told), "Eat and drink in good health as a reward for what you have done".
Thus do We reward the righteous ones.
On that day, woe would be upon those who have rejected God's revelations!
(Disbelievers), eat and enjoy yourselves for a little while. You are certainly sinful ones.
On that day, woe would be upon those who have rejected God's revelations!
When they are told to say their prayers, they do not bow down (in prayer).
On that day, woe would be upon those who have rejected God's revelations!
In which word other than the Quran will they believe?
