AlifLaamRa. Those are the verses of the Wise Book.
Is it a wonder to the people that We revealed to a man from among themselves: 'Warn mankind, and bear the glad tidings to those who believe that they stand firm with their Lord' (Yet) the unbelievers say: 'This is a clear sorcerer'
Indeed, your Lord is Allah, who, in six days created the heavens and the earth and then willed to the Throne, directing affairs. There is no intercessor except by His permission. Such is Allah your Lord, therefore worship Him. Will you not remember?
To Him all of you will return together. This is, in truth, the promise of Allah. He originates creation, then He revives it so that He may recompense those who believe and do righteous deeds. As for the unbelievers, theirs is a drink of boiling water and a painful punishment for their disbelief.
It was He that made the sun a brightness and the moon a light, and determined it in phases so that you might know the number of years and the reckoning. Allah did not create them except in truth, and distinguishes the verses to a nation who know.
In the alternation of the night and day, and in all that Allah has created in the heavens and the earth, surely there are signs for people who are cautious.
Those who do not expect to meet Us, and are wellpleased with this life and are satisfied with it, and those who are inattentive to Our signs,
for them, their refuge is the Fire for what they have been earning.
Indeed, those who believe and do righteous works, their Lord will guide them for their belief, beneath them rivers will flow in gardens of bliss.
(In it) their supplication will be: 'Exaltations to You, Allah' And their greeting will be: 'Peace' They will end their supplication with 'Praise be to Allah, Lord of the all the Worlds'
If Allah should hasten evil to people as they would hasten good, their term would already have been decided. But We leave those who do not expect to meet Us to wander blindly in their insolence.
When affliction befalls a man, he supplicates to Us (lying) on his side, sitting or standing. But as soon as We relieve him from his affliction, he continues (in the same way), as though he never supplicated to Us when harm touched him. So it is, that which the sinners were doing seem fairly decorated to them.
We destroyed generations before you when they did evil. (When) their Messengers came to them with clear verses they would not believe; so We recompense the sinning nation.
After them We made you their successors in the earth, so that We might see how you would do.
When Our verses, clear verses, are recited to them, those who do not reckon to meet Us say: 'Bring a Koran other than this, or make changes in it' Say: 'It is not for me to change it by myself. I follow nothing, except what is sent down to me. Indeed, if I should rebel against my Lord I fear the punishment of a Great Day.'
Say (Prophet Muhammad): 'Had Allah willed, I would not have recited it to you, nor would He have made it known to you. I lived among you all my life before it (was sent down). Will you not understand?
Who does greater evil than he who forges a lie about Allah or belies His verses? Indeed, the evildoers do not prosper.
They worship, other than Allah, that which can neither harm nor benefit them, and say: 'These are our intercessors with Allah' Say: 'Will you tell Allah of something He does not know about either in the heavens or earth? Exaltations to Him! Exalted be He above what they associate'
(Before) mankind were but one nation, then they differed with one another. But for a Word that preceded from your Lord, it (the matters) over which they differed had already been decided.
They say: 'Why has no sign been sent down to him from his Lord' Say: 'The Unseen belongs to Allah alone. Wait if you will I am one of those who wait'
When We let people taste (Our) mercy after they had been afflicted by hardship, they devise against Our verses. Say: 'Allah is more swift in devising' Indeed, Our Messengers (the angels) are writing down whatever you devise.
It is He who conveys you by land and sea. When you are on board the ship and the ships run with them upon a fair breeze they are joyful. (But when) a strong wind and waves come upon them from every side, and they think they are encompassed, they supplicate to Allah, making their religion His sincerely, (saying): 'If You save us from this, we will indeed be among the thankful'
But when He has saved them, see how they become wrongfully insolent in the land. People, your insolence is only against yourselves; the enjoyment of this present life, then to Us you shall return and We shall tell you what you did.
This present life is like the water We send down from the sky. The plants of the earth mix with it and from it mankind and cattle eat; then when the earth has become lush and adorned, its inhabitants think they have power over it, Our command comes upon it by night or day, and We cause it to be stubble, just as though it had not flourished the day before. In this way We distinguish Our verses for those who reflect.
Allah invites you to the House of Peace. He guides whom He will to a Straight Path
for those who do good is a fine reward and a surplus. Neither dust nor shame shall cover their faces. Those are the companions of Paradise in it they shall live for ever.
As for those who have earned evil deeds, evil shall be recompensed with its like. Abasement will cover them, they shall have none to defend them from Allah as though their faces were covered with parts of the blackness of night. Those, they are the companions of the Fire, in it they shall live for ever.
And on the Day when We assemble them all together, We shall say to those who associated (other gods with Allah): 'Go to your place, you and your associates' Then, We will separate them, and their associates will say (to them): 'It was not us that you worshipped'
Allah is a Sufficient witness between us and you, surely, we were heedless of your worship.
There, each soul shall prove its past deeds. They shall be restored to Allah, their Guardian, the True, and that which they forged will escape from them.
Say: 'Who provides for you from heaven and earth, or who owns the hearing and the sight? Who brings forth the living from the dead, and the dead from the living' Who directs the affair? Surely, they will say: 'Allah' Then say: 'Then, will you not be fearful'
Such is Allah, your Lord, the True. What, is there after truth, anything except error. Then how are you turned around (from faith)'
So the Word of your Lord is realized against the evildoers that they do not believe.
Say: 'Is there any (among) your associates who originates creation, then cause it to be revived yet again' Say: 'Allah, He originates creation, then revives it yet again. How is it that you are so perverted'
Say: 'Do any of your partners guide you to the truth' Say: 'Allah, He guides to the truth. Who then is worthier to be followed He who guides to the truth or he who cannot guide unless he (himself) is guided? What is the matter with you, how then can you judge'
Most of them follow nothing except conjecture. But conjecture does not help against the truth. Allah knows the things they do.
This Koran could not have been forged by other than Allah. It confirms what was before it; a distinguishing Book, in which there is no doubt, from the Lord of all the worlds.
Do they say: 'He has forged it'. Say: 'Compose one chapter like it, and call upon whom you will, other than Allah (to help you), if what you say is true'
They have belied that which they did not understand of its knowledge, nor has its interpretation reached them. Those who were before also belied. But see how was the end of the harmdoers.
Some believe in it, while others do not believe it. Your Lord knows well the corrupters.
If they belie you, say: 'I have my work, you have your work. You are quit of what I do, and I am quit of what you do'
Some of them listen to you. But can you make the deaf hear you, even though they cannot understand?
Some of them look to you. But can you guide the blind, even though they do not see?
Indeed, Allah does not wrong mankind a thing, but they wrong themselves.
The Day when He will gather them, (it will be) as though they had lingered but an hour of the Day and they will recognize one another. Lost are those who belied the meeting with their Lord and were not guided.
Whether We let you see some of that with which We promised them, or We call you to Us, to Us they shall return. Allah is witness of the things they do.
Every nation has its Messenger. Then, when their Messenger comes the matter is justly decided between them; they are not wronged.
They ask: 'If what you say is true, when will this promise come'
Say: 'I have no power to benefit or harm myself except as Allah wills. To every nation is a fixed term and when their term comes they cannot delay it for an hour, nor can they bring it forward.
Say: 'Have you considered? Should His punishment come upon you by night or by day, what (part) of it would the sinners try to hasten'
And when it overtakes you, is it then that you will believe in it, now, when you already try to hasten it!
Then it shall be said to the evildoers: 'Taste the punishment of eternity! Shall you be recompensed except according to what you earned'
They ask you to tell them if it is true. Say: 'Yes, by my Lord! It is true, and you cannot frustrate it'
If each soul that has done evil had all that is in the earth, it would offer it for its ransom. And secretly they will feel regret when they see the punishment, and the matter is justly decided between them, and they are not wronged.
Indeed, to Allah belongs everything in the heavens and the earth. Indeed, the promise of Allah is true though most of them do not have knowledge.
It is He who gives life and causes death, and to Him you shall be returned.
People, an admonition has now come to you from your Lord, and a healing for what is in the chests, a guide and a mercy to believers.
Say: 'In the Bounty of Allah and His Mercy let them rejoice, it (the Koran) is better than that which they hoard'
Say: 'Have you considered the provision that Allah has sent down for you, and some you have made unlawful and some lawful' Say: 'Has Allah given you His permission, or do you forge (falsehood) against Allah'
What will those who forged falsehood about Allah think on the Day of Resurrection? Allah is Bountiful to mankind; yet most of them do not give thanks.
You are not engaged in any matter, neither do you recite any portion of the Koran, nor do you do any work, except that We are witnesses over you when you press upon it? Not even as much as the weight of an ant in earth or heaven escapes your Lord, nor is there anything smaller or greater, but it is (recorded) in a Clear Book.
Indeed, there shall be neither fear nor sorrow upon the guided by Allah.
Those who believe and are cautious
there is for them glad tidings in this present life and in the Everlasting Life. The Word of Allah is unchanging, that is the mighty triumph.
Do not let their speech grieve you. All might belongs to Allah. He is the Hearing, the Knowing.
Attention: Indeed to Allah belongs everyone that is in the heavens and in the earth. Those who call upon associates, other than Allah, follow nothing but assumptions, (they are) only lying.
He it is who has made the night for your rest and the day to see. Surely, in this there are signs for people who listen.
They say: 'Allah has taken a son' Exaltations be to Him (Allah)! Rich is He. To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth you have no authority for this! What, do you say of Allah what you do not know?
Say: 'Those who forge falsehoods against Allah shall not prosper'
(They take their) enjoyment in this world, but to Us they shall return, then, We shall let them taste the terrible punishment because they were unbelievers'
And recite to them the story of Noah. He said to his nation: 'O my nation, if my standing here, reminding you of the verses of Allah grieves you, and in Allah I have put my trust; decide upon your affair with your associates, then do not let your affair worry you. Come to a decision about me, and give me no respite.
Then, if you turn your backs, I have not asked of you a wage. My wage falls only on Allah. I am commanded to be from those who surrender (Muslims)'
But they belied him. Therefore We saved him and those who were with him in the Ark, and We made them caliphs, and We drowned those who belied Our verses. See what was the end of those who were warned!
After him We sent Messengers to their nation. They brought them clear signs, but they were not of those to believe because they had belied it previously. SoWe seal the hearts of the evildoers.
Then, after them We sent Moses and Aaron with Our signs to Pharaoh and his Council. But they were arrogant, for they were a sinful nation.
When the truth came to them from Us they said: 'This is indeed clear magic'
Moses said: 'Is this what you say of the truth when it has come to you? Is this sorcery? Sorcerers do not prosper'
They said: 'Have you come to turn us away from that which we found our fathers practicing (in order that) the domination of the land might belong to you two? We do not believe you'
(Then) Pharaoh said: 'Bring every skilled sorcerer'
When the sorcerers came, Moses said to them: 'Cast down what you will cast'
And when they had cast, Moses said: 'What you have brought is sorcery. Surely, Allah will render it as nothing. Allah does not put right the work of the corrupt'
Allah verifies the truth by His Words, even though the sinners hate it.
So none believed Moses except a few of his nation because they feared that Pharaoh and their Council would persecute them. Pharaoh was mighty in theland, and one of the evildoers.
Moses said: 'O my nation, if you believe in Allah, put your trust in Him, if you have surrendered (Muslims)'
They said: 'We have put our trust in Allah. Our Lord, do not let us be a temptation to the harmdoing nation.
Save us, through Your Mercy, from the unbelieving nation'
We revealed to Moses and his brother: 'Take certain houses for your people in Egypt. Make your houses a direction (for pray); establish the prayer; and give glad tidings to the believers'
'Our Lord' supplicated Moses. 'You have given Pharaoh and his Council adornments and possessions in this life. Our Lord, let them go astray from YourPath. Our Lord, destroy their possessions and harden their hearts so that they shall not believe until they see the painful punishment.
He (Allah) said: 'Your supplication is answered; so go straight and do not follow the way of those who do not know'
We brought the Children of Israel through the sea, and Pharaoh and his legions pursued them arrogantly and frantically. But as he was drowning he cried out: '(Now) I believe that there is no god except He in whom the Children of Israel believe. I am of those that surrender (Muslims)'
(Allah said): 'Now (you believe)! But before this you rebelled and were of the corrupt.
We shall deliver you (Ramsis II) with your body this day, so that you may be a sign to those after you. Indeed many people pay no heed to Our signs!
(Thereafter) We settled the Children of Israel in a blessed land and provided them with good things. They did not differ until knowledge was given them. Indeed, your Lord will decide between them on the Day of Resurrection.
If you are in doubt of what We have sent down to you, ask those who recite the Book before you. The truth has come to you from your Lord, therefore do not be of the doubters.
Do not be among those who belie the verses of Allah, for then you would be among the losers.
Those against whom the Word of your Lord will be realized will not believe,
even though every sign comes to them, until they see the painful punishment.
Why, was there never a village that believed and its belief benefited them? Except Jonah's nation, when they believed, We spared them from a degrading punishment in this life and We gave them enjoyment for awhile.
Had your Lord willed, whosoever is in the earth, all would have believed. Would you then constrain people until they believe?
No soul can believe except by the permission of Allah. Upon those who do not understand lays His punishment.
Say: 'See what is in the heavens and the earth' But neither signs nor warnings help the unbelievers.
Do they watch and wait for anything except for days similar to those who passed away before them? Say: 'Wait; I shall be with you among those who arewaiting'
Then we shall save Our Messengers and the believers. It is Our obligated duty, We shall save those who believe.
Say: 'O people! If you are in doubt concerning my religion, I worship none of those you worship, other than Allah but I worship Allah, who will cause you to die, for I am commanded to be among the believers,
and, set your face towards the religion, being of pure faith, and do not be among the idolaters.
Do not pray to, other than Allah, to anything that can neither help nor harm you, for if you do, you will become a harmdoer.
If Allah touches you an affliction none can remove it except He; and if He wills any good for you, none can repel His Bounty. He causes it to fall upon whosoever of His worshippers that He will. He is the Forgiving, the Most Merciful.'
Say: 'O people! The truth has come to you from your Lord. Whosoever is guided is guided only for himself, and whosoever goes astray, he is astray for himself. I am not a guardian over you'
Follow what is revealed to you, and be patient till Allah shall judge, and He is the Best of judges.
