AlifLaamRa. We have sent down to you (this Book) in order that you bring mankind from darkness to the light by the permission of your Lord, to the Path of the Almighty, the Praised.
Allah to whom belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth. Woe to the unbelievers for a terrible punishment.
Those who prefer this life more than the Everlasting Life, and bar others from the way of Allah and seek to make it crooked they are in far error.
We have sent no Messenger except in the tongue of his own nation, so that he might make everything plain to them. But Allah leads astray whom He will and guides whom He will. He is the Almighty, the Wise.
We sent Moses with Our signs, 'Bring your nation out of darkness into the light, and remind them of the Days of Allah' Surely, in that are signs for every patient, thankful (person).
Moses said to his nation: 'Remember the blessing of Allah to you when He saved you from Pharaoh's family, who had oppressed you cruelly, and who slew your sons and spared your women. Surely, that was a great trial from your Lord.
And when your Lord proclaimed: "If you give thanks, I will increase you, but, if you are unthankful My punishment is indeed stern.'
And Moses said: 'If you and all mankind are thankless, He is surely Rich, Praised'
Have you not heard what befell the nations that have gone before you? The nations of Noah, Aad, and Thamood, and those who came after? None knows them but Allah. Their Messengers came to them with clear signs, but they thrust their hands into their mouths and said: 'Without doubt we disbelieve the Message you have been sent with. That which you call us to is disquieting'
Their Messengers said: 'Is there any doubt about Allah, the Originator of the heavens and the earth? He calls you to Him in order that He forgives you your sins and defers you till a stated term' They said: 'You are only mortals like us. You wish to bar us from that which our fathers worshipped. Give us some clear proof.'
Their Messengers said to them: 'We are nothing except humans like you. But Allah bestows His Mercy on those of His worshipers whom He chooses. We cannot give you proof, except with the permission of Allah. In Allah, let believers put their trust.
And why should we not put our trust in Allah, when He has already guided us to our Paths? We will endure your hurt patiently. In Allah, let all who trust place their trust'
Those who disbelieved said to their Messengers: 'Return to our faith or we will banish you from our land' But Allah revealed to them: 'We shall destroy the harmdoers
and let you live in the land after them. This is for him who fears My station and fears My threat'
They sought a judgment, then every tyrant was disappointed.
Gehenna (Hell) is before him and he is given oozing pus to drink,
which he gulps and can scarcely swallow. Death will come to him from every side, yet he cannot not die, and yet to come is a dreadful punishment.
As for the likeness of those who disbelieve in their Lord, their works are like ashes which a strong wind scatters on a stormy day; they are powerless over that they have earned; that is the far error.
Do you not see that Allah has created the heavens and the earth with truth? He can put you away if He will and bring into being a new creation;
indeed, that is no great thing for Allah.
Together they shall all come before Allah. Then the weak will say to those who were proud: 'We were your followers. Can you help us in anything against the punishment of Allah' They will say: 'Had Allah guided us we would have guided you. It is now the same for us whether we cannot endure or bear patiently, we have no place of refuge'
And when the issue has been decided, satan will say (to them): 'The promise which Allah made you was true. I promised you, but failed to keep it. I had no authority over you except that I called you, and you answered me. Do not bame me, rather, blame yourselves. I cannot help you, nor can you help me. I disbelieved in your associating me (with Allah) before' Indeed, for the evildoers there is a painful punishment.
As for those who believe and do good works, they shall be admitted to gardens underneath which rivers flow in which, by the permission of their Lord, they shall live for ever. Their greeting shall be: 'Peace'
Have you not seen how Allah sets forth a parable that a good deed is like a good tree, its roots are firm and its branches are in the heaven,
yielding its fruit every season by the permission of Allah? Allah gives parables to mankind so that they might remember.
The likeness of a corrupt word is like a corrupt tree uprooted from the earth having no stability.
Allah will strengthen the believers with a steadfast Word, both in this life and in the Everlasting Life. Allah leads the evildoers astray. Allah does what He will.
Have you not seen those who exchanged the favor of Allah with disbelief and landed their nation in a house of ruin?
They shall be roasted in Gehenna; an evil establishment!
They set up rivals with Allah to lead others astray. Say to them: 'Take your pleasure; your arrival shall be the Fire'
Tell My worshippers, those who believe, who establish the prayer, and spend of what We have given them in private and in public, before the coming of that Day in which there is neither bargaining, nor the taking of friends,
it is Allah who created the heavens and the earth, and sends down water from the heaven with which He brings forth fruits for your provision. He has subjected to you ships which, by His command, run upon the sea. He has subjected to you rivers,
and He subjected to you the sun and the moon, which are constant in their courses. And, He has subjected to you the night and the day, and gave you all that you asked of Him.
If you count the blessings of Allah, you will never number them. Indeed, the human is wicked and thankless.
And when Abraham said: 'My Lord, make this a land secure. Turn me and my children away from worshipping idols.
My Lord they have led many people astray. Whosoever follows me belongs to me. Whosoever rebels against me, You are surely Forgiving, the MostMerciful.
'Our Lord, I have settled some of my offspring in a barren valley near Your Holy House; our Lord, in order that they establish the prayer. Make the hearts of people yearn towards them, and provide them with fruits, in order that they are thankful.
Our Lord, You have knowledge of all that we hide and all that we reveal; nothing in heaven or earth is hidden from Allah.
Praise be to Allah who has given me Ishmael and Isaac in my old age! Indeed, my Lord is the Hearer of the supplication.
My Lord, make me and my descendants establishers of prayer. Our Lord, accept my prayer.
Forgive me, our Lord, and forgive my parents and all the believers on the Day of Reckoning'
Do not think that Allah is unaware of the harmdoers work. He only gives them respite till the Day on which all eyes will stare,
when they shall run with their necks outstretched and heads erect, their glances never return to themselves, their hearts are empty.
Warn mankind of the Day when the punishment will overtake them, when the evildoers will say: 'Our Lord, grant us respite for awhile, we will answer Your call, and follow the Messengers' Did you not once swear that you would never cease?
You lived in the dwellings of those who wronged themselves, and it was clear to you how We dealt with them, and how We struck parables for you.
They plotted their plots, but their plots are (known) to Allah, even though their plots were such as to move mountains.
Do not think that Allah will break the promise He gave to His Messengers. Mighty is Allah, and Vengeful.
On the Day when the earth is changed into other than the earth and the heavens, all shall come before Allah, the One, the Conqueror.
On that Day, you shall see the sinners coupled together in fetters;
their garments shall be of melted tar, and their faces enveloped by the Fire.
Allah will recompense each soul according to its earnings. Swift is the Reckoning of Allah.
This is a message to be delivered to mankind so that they may be warned by it, and know that He is (Allah) One God, and so all those possessed of minds may remember.
