AlifLaamRa. Those are the verses of the Book, the Clear Koran.
It could be that those who disbelieve will wish that they were Muslims.
Let them eat and enjoy; and let their hopes deceive them, soon they shall know.
We never destroyed a village whose term had not already been decreed.
No nation can outstrip its term, nor do they put it back.
They say: 'You to whom the Remembrance is sent down, you are indeed mad.
Why do you not bring down the angels, if what you say is true'
We do not send angels except with the truth. Then they shall have no respite.
It is We who sent down the Koran, and We watch over it.
We have sent forth before you Messengers among the factions of the ancients.
But no Messenger came to them except he was mocked.
So We make it enter the hearts of the sinners.
They do not believe in it even though the practice of the ancients has already gone.
If We opened a gate in the heaven and they kept ascending through it,
still they would say: 'Our eyes were dazzled; truly, we must have been a bewitched people'
We have set constellations in the heavens and made them pleasing to the beholders,
and guarded them from every stoned satan.
Except for he who steals the listening and is then pursued by a visible flame.
We have spread out the earth and set upon it firm mountains. Everything We have caused to grow therein is justly weighed;
and there appointed for you is a livelihood, and for those you do not provide.
And there is not a thing but with Us are its treasuries, and We do not send it down except in a known measure.
We send the winds fertilizing, and We send down out of heaven water, from which you drink and you are not its treasurers.
And surely, it is We who give life and make to die. We are the Inheritor.
We know those of you who press forward, and We know the laggards,
and it is your Lord who will gather them. He is Wise, Knowing.
We created mankind from clay, molded from mud,
and before him We created the jinn from smokeless fire.
When your Lord said to the angels: 'See, I am creating a mortal from clay of molded mud.
When I have shaped him and ran My created soul in him fall down prostrating towards him'.
All the angels prostrated themselves,
except iblis (father of the jinn) who refused to be one of those who prostrated themselves.
He said: 'iblis, what is the matter with you, that you do you not prostrate yourself'
He replied: 'I will not prostrate to a mortal You have created of clay, from molded mud'
(Allah) said: 'Begone, you are accursed!
A curse shall be on you till the Day of Recompense'
He said: 'My Lord, reprieve me till the Day they are raised'
He answered: 'You are among those reprieved
till the appointed time.
(satan) said: 'My Lord, for Your perverting me, I shall make (matters) in the earth seem most fair to them and I shall pervert all,
except the devoted amongst Your worshippers.
He (Allah) said: 'This is for Me the Right Path
over My worshipers you have no authority, except the perverse that follow you.
Gehenna (Hell) will be the promise for all of them.
It has seven gates, and through each gate a portion of them belong.
But the cautious shall live amongst gardens and fountains:
'In peace and security, enter them'
We shall remove all rancor from their hearts, and as brethren they shall recline on couches face to face.
There, no fatigue shall smite them, nor shall they ever be driven from it'
Tell My worshipers that I am the Forgiving, the Most Merciful,
and that My punishment is the painful chastisement.
Tell them of Abraham's guests.
They entered to him and said: 'Peace' but he replied: 'We are afraid of you'
'Do not be afraid' they answered. 'We come to give you glad tidings of a knowledgeable child'
He said: 'What is this, do you bring me glad tidings even though I am old' Of what do you give me glad tidings'
They replied: 'In truth we have given you glad tidings, do not be one of those who despair'
He replied: 'And who despairs of the mercy of his Lord, except those that are astray?
He asked: 'Messengers, what is your errand'
They replied: 'We are sent to sinful nation.
Except Lot's family, of whom we shall save all,
but his wife. We decreed that she should be amongst those who remain behind.
And when the envoys came to the family of Lot,
he said to them: 'I do not know you'
'No' they replied: 'We bring you (news) of that concerning which they were doubting.
We bring you the truth, and indeed we are truthful.
Depart with your family in a part of the night and walk behind them and let none of you turn round. Go to a place where you are commanded'
And We made known to him this decree that the wrongdoers were to be utterly cut off in the morning.
The people of the city came to him rejoicing.
He said: 'These are my guests; do not shame me.
Fear Allah and do not disgrace me'
They replied: 'Have we not forbidden you (the people of) the worlds'
He said: 'Here are my daughters; take them (in marriage), if you would be doing'
By your life, they wandered blindly in their dazzlement.
At sunrise a dreadful Shout seized them.
We laid it (the city) upside down and rained stones of baked clay upon them.
Surely, in that there are signs for those who contemplate.
Indeed, it is on a way which still exists.
Surely, in that there is a sign for those who believe.
The dwellers of the Thicket were harmdoers.
On them, too, We took vengeance, and they are both on a clear roadway.
And the dwellers of Al Hijr also belied the Messengers.
We brought them signs, but they turned away.
They hewed their dwellings out of the mountains in safety.
But the Shout seized them in the morning,
and that which they had earned did not help them.
We did not create the heavens and the earth, and what is between them except in truth. The Hour is sure to come, therefore, forgive them with a graciouspardon.
Your Lord is the Creator, the Knower.
We have given you the seven dual (verses, Al Fatihah) and the Mighty Holy Reading (Koran).
Do not stretch your eyes to that We have given pairs of them to enjoy, nor sorrow for them, and lower your wing to the believers.
And say: 'I am the plain warner'
So We sent it down to the partitioners,
who have broken the Koran into parts,
so by your Lord, We will question them all
about what they did.
Proclaim then, what you are commanded and turn away from the unbelievers.
We suffice you against those who mock,
and those who set up other gods with Allah, indeed, they will soon know.
Indeed, We know your chest is straitened by that they say.
Exalt with the praise of your Lord and be one of those who prostrate.
Worship your Lord till the certainty (death) comes to you.
