The Command of Allah will surely come; do not seek to hasten it. Highly exalted is He above that they associate with Him.
He sends down the angels with the Spirit (Gabriel) by His command to those of His worshipers whom He chooses, (saying:) 'Warn, there is no god except Me, therefore fear Me'
He created the heavens and the earth with truth. Exalted is He above what they associate (with Him)!
He created mankind from a sperm drop, yet he is a clear adversary.
And the cattle He created for you. In them, you have warmth and other uses, and of them you eat.
In them there is beauty for you when you bring them home and when you lead them to pasture.
They carry your loads to a land which you could not otherwise reach except by painful toil to oneself. Your Lord is the Clement, the Most Merciful.
(He has created for you) horses, mules, and donkeys, which you ride and as an adornment; and He creates what you do not know.
It is for Allah to show the way. Some swerve from it, but had He willed, He would have guided all of you.
It is He who sends down water from heaven, which provides drink for you and brings forth trees on which your herds feed.
And thereby He brings forth crops and olives, palms and vines, and all the fruits. Surely, in this there is a sign for a nation who think.
He has subjected to you the night, the day, the sun and the moon. The stars are subjected by His Command. Surely, in that there is a sign for a nation who understands.
And what He has multiplied for you in the earth is of various hues; surely, in that there is a sign for a nation who remember.
It is He who has subjected the sea to you, so that you eat of its soft flesh and bring up from it ornaments which you wear. And you see the ships plowingtheir course through it in order that you seek His bounty and give thanks.
He set firm mountains upon the earth lest it should shake with you; and rivers, and roads, in order that you are guided.
And waymarks; and by the star they are guided.
Is He who creates as he who does not create? Will you not remember?
If you count the favors of Allah, you could not number them. Indeed, Allah is Forgiving and the Most Merciful.
Allah has knowledge of all that you hide and all that you reveal.
But those whom you invoke, other than Allah do not create anything they are themselves created.
They are dead, not living; and they do not know when they will be raised (to life).
Your God is One God. Those who do not believe in the Everlasting Life their hearts disbelieve, and are puffed up with pride.
Allah knows without doubt what they hide and what they make known. He does not love the proud.
And if they are asked: 'What has your Lord revealed' they say: 'Tales of the ancients, fairytales'
They shall carry their sins completely on the Day of Resurrection, and some of the sins of those who were led astray by them without knowledge. Evil is that which they sin.
Those who have gone before them also plotted. Then, Allah came upon their building from the foundations, and the roof fell down on them from above them. And the punishment overtook them from where they did not know.
He will degrade them on the Day of Resurrection. He will say: 'Where are My partners, for whose sake you opposed' And those to whom knowledge has been given will say: 'Degradation today and evil are on the unbelievers,
whom the angels take while they were still harming themselves' Then they will offer submission, saying: 'We have done no evil' No, surely Allah knows what you have done.
Enter the gates of Gehenna (Hell) to be in it for ever. Evil is the lodging of the proud.
It is said to the cautious: 'What has your Lord revealed' They will reply: 'Good' For those who did good in this world is goodness; indeed the lodging in the Everlasting Life is better an excellent dwelling for the cautious.
They shall enter the Gardens of Eden, under which rivers flow, and there they shall have all they desire. So Allah recompenses the cautious,
whom the angels take while they are goodly, saying: 'Peace be on you. Enter Paradise for what you were doing'
Are they looking for the angels to come down or the order of your Lord to come? As such did those who have gone before them. Allah did not wrong them, but they wronged themselves,
so the evil things which they did coiled around them, and they were encompassed by that they mocked.
The idolaters say: 'Had Allah willed, neither we nor our fathers would have worshipped anything other than Him, nor would we have forbidden anything without Him', as such did those before them. Yet what should Messengers do but give a clear deliverance?
We sent a Messenger to every nation, saying: 'Worship Allah and avoid the idols' Amongst them were some whom Allah guided, and some justly disposed to error. Travel in the land and see what was the end of those who belied (the Revelation and the prophets)!
Though you are ever so eager to guide them, Allah will not guide those who mislead (others). There shall be none to help them.
They solemnly swear by Allah that Allah will never raise the dead to life. No, surely the promise of Allah is binding upon Him, though most people do not know.
This is in order that He may make clear to them that which they differed upon, and in order that those who disbelieve might know that they were indeed lying.
When We decree a thing, We only say: 'Be' and it is.
And those who after they have been wronged emigrated for the Cause of Allah, We will lodge them with a good (life) in this world, but greater still is the wage of the Everlasting Life, if they but knew;
such are those who are patient, and put their trust in their Lord.
We never sent but men before you to whom We revealed, ask the people of the Remembrance, if you do not know.
(We sent them) with clear signs and the Psalms. And We sent down to you the Remembrance so that you can make clear to people what has been sent down to them, in order that they reflect.
Do those who do evil feel secure that Allah will not make the earth to swallow them, or that the punishment will not fall upon them from where they do not know?
Or, that He will not seize them in their going to and fro, and they will not be able to frustrate Him?
Or, that He will not seize them, a little at a time and destroy them? Indeed, your Lord is Clement, the Most Merciful.
Do they not see how every thing Allah created casts its shadow right and left, prostrating itself before Allah in all humility?
Everything in the heavens and every crawling creature on earth, and the angels prostrate to Allah and they are not proud;
they fear their Lord from above them and do as they are commanded.
Allah says: 'Do not take to yourself two gods. He is only One God; so have awe of Me'
To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth. His is the Religion for ever. Would you then fear any but Allah?
Whatever favor you have is from Allah. Whenever you are afflicted you groan to Him.
When He removes your affliction then some of you set up associates to their Lord
that they may show ingratitude for what We gave them. So, take your pleasure, you shall soon know.
They set aside a share of that which We have provided them for what they did not know. By Allah, you shall be questioned about your forgeries!
They ascribe daughters to Allah exaltations to Him! But they themselves would have what they desire!
When good news of the birth of a female is given to any of them, his face grows dark and inwardly he chokes.
Because of the evil of the good news he hides himself from people, (pondering) whether he will keep her and be humiliated, or trample her into the dust. Evil is their judgement!
Those who do not believe in the Everlasting Life, theirs is the evil likeness; and for Allah is the highest likeness. He is the Mighty, the Wise.
If Allah punished people for their sins, He would not leave one creature that crawls on the earth. He reprieves them to an appointed term; when their term is come, they shall neither delay it by a single hour nor can they hasten it.
They ascribe to Allah what they themselves dislike. Their tongues utter falsehoods (when they say) the finest of wages shall be theirs. Without doubt, the Fire shall be theirs and they will be hastened to it.
Indeed, by Allah, We have sent Messengers before you to other nations. But satan made their deeds seem fair to them so that today he is their guardian, and a painful punishment awaits them.
We have not revealed to you (Prophet Muhammad) the Book except that you may clarify for them that upon which they differ, and as guidance and mercy to a nation who believe.
Allah sends down water from the sky with which He revives the earth after its death. Surely, in this there is a sign for people who listen.
Indeed, in the cattle there is a lesson for you. We give you to drink of that which is in their bellies, between the filth (bowels) and blood, pure milk, which is sweet to those who drink.
And the fruits of the palm and of the vine, from which you derive intoxicants and wholesome provisions. Surely, in this there is a sign for nation who understand.
Your Lord revealed to the bee: 'Build your homes in the mountains, in the trees, and in what they are building.
Eat every kind of fruit, and follow the easy ways of your Lord' From its belly comes forth a drink (honey) of many hues in which there is healing for people. Surely, in this there is a sign for a nation who reflect.
Allah created you, and causes you to die. There are some of you who, after knowing something, will be kept back to the vilest state of life, knowing nothing. Allah is the Knowing, Powerful.
In your provisions Allah has preferred some of you above others. But, those who have been preferred do not give their provisions to those whom their right hand possess so that they might be equal therein. What, do they vainly disbelieve the favor of Allah?
Allah has given you wives from among yourselves, and has given you and your wives, sons and grandsons and He has provided you with good things. What, do they believe in vanity; do they disbelieve in the favor of Allah?
Do they worship, other than Allah, that which has no power to provide them with anything either from the heavens or earth, and can do nothing!
Therefore, do not strike parables for Allah; Allah knows, but you do not!
Allah strikes a parable. A servant owned by his master, having no power over anything, and one to whom We have given from Us a fine provision who spends it secretly and openly, are they equal? Praise be to Allah! No, most of them do not know!
And Allah strikes a parable. Two men, one is dumb and powerless, a burden to his master wherever he sends him he returns with no good. Is he equal with one who orders justice and follows the Straight Path?
To Allah belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth. The matter of the Final Hour shall be like the twinkling of an eye, or even less. Allah has power over all things.
Allah brought you out of your mothers' wombs, and gave you hearing, sight and hearts, in order that you be thankful.
Have they not seen the birds that are subjected in the air of the heaven? Nothing holds them except Allah. Surely, in this are signs for those who believe.
And it is Allah who has given you houses in which to rest, and from the hides of cattle homes so they are light for you on the day you travel and on the day of settling; while from their wool, fur, and hair (He has given you) furnishing and enjoyment for a while.
From the things He created, Allah has given you a covering shade, and He has made for you refuges in the mountains. He has given you garments to protect you from the heat, and garments to protect you from your own violence. As such it is that He perfects His favors upon you, in order that you submit.
But, if they turn away, your mission is only to give plain warning.
They recognize the favors of Allah, then they disbelieve them; most of them are unbelievers.
On the Day We shall raise up from every nation a witness, then permission will not be given to the unbelievers, nor shall they be allowed to make restitution.
And when the harmdoers see their punishment, it shall never be lightened, nor shall they ever be respited.
And when the idolaters see their associates they will say: 'Our Lord, these are our associates on whom we called other than You' But they will throw back at them saying: 'Surely, you are truly liars'
On that Day they shall offer to submit to Allah, and what they forged will forsake them.
Those who disbelieve and bar others from the Path of Allah, We shall add punishment upon their punishment because they were corrupting.
And on that Day We shall raise up from every nation a witness from their own against them, and We shall bring you (Prophet Muhammad) as a witness against those. And We have sent down to you the Book making everything clear, as a guidance, and mercy, and glad tidings to those who submit.
Allah orders justice, and good deeds, and giving to one's kindred. He forbids indecency, dishonor and insolence. He admonishes you in order that you take heed.
Fulfill the covenant of Allah, when you make a covenant and do not break your oaths after they have been confirmed (by swearing in His Name) for you make Allah your surety. Allah has knowledge of what you do.
Do not be like the woman who breaks her thread, after it is firmly spun into fibers, by taking your oaths as mere mutual deceit, one nation being more numerous than the other. Allah tries you with it. On the Day of Resurrection, He will clarify to you everything on which you were at variance.
Had Allah willed, He would have made you one nation. But He leads astray whomsoever He will and gives guidance to whomsoever He will. You shall be questioned about what you did.
Do not take oaths to deceive each other, lest your foot should slip after its firmness, lest you should taste evil, for you barred others from the Path of Allah, and lest a mighty punishment awaits you.
Do not sell the covenant of Allah for a trifling price. What is with Allah is better for you if you but knew.
That which you have is transitory, but that which is with Allah endures. We shall reward the patient according to the best of their deeds,
For whosoever does a righteous deed, be they believing men or women, We shall recompense them with their wage according to the best of their deeds.
When you recite the Koran, seek refuge in Allah from the stoned satan:
he has no authority over the believers who put their trust in their Lord.
He has authority over those who are guided by him, and those who ascribe associates to Him (Allah).
When We exchange a verse for another and Allah knows best what He is sending down they say: 'You are but a forger' No, most of them do not know.
Say: 'The Holy Spirit (Gabriel) brought it down from your Lord in truth to confirm those who believe, and to give guidance and glad tidings to those who surrender'
We know very well that they say: 'A mortal teaches him' The tongue of him at whom they hint is a nonArab; and this is a clear Arabic tongue.
Those who disbelieve in the verses of Allah, Allah does not guide them for them is a painful punishment.
None forge lies except those who disbelieve the verses of Allah those, they are the liars.
Whosoever disbelieves in Allah after believing except he who is forced while his heart remains in his belief but he who opens his chest for disbelief, shall receive the Anger of Allah and for such awaits a mighty punishment.
That is because they loved this present life above the Everlasting Life. Allah does not guide the unbelievers.
They are those whose hearts, hearing and sight are sealed by Allah; they are the heedless.
In the Everlasting Life, they shall assuredly be the losers.
Then indeed your Lord? to those who emigrated, after they were persecuted, and then strove and were patient, surely, your Lord is thereafter Forgiving, the Most Merciful.
On the Day when every soul will come pleading for itself and when every soul will be recompensed in full for what it did they shall not be wronged.
Allah strikes a parable of the village which was safe and peaceful. Its provisions came in abundance from everywhere; but it was thankless for the favors of Allah. Therefore, for what they were doing, Allah let it taste the garment of hunger and fear.
A Messenger from their own was sent to them, but they belied him. So while they were harmdoers they were seized by the punishment.
Eat of the lawful and good things with which Allah has provided you and be thankful for the favors of Allah if it is He you worship.
These things alone He has forbidden to you: what is already dead, blood, the flesh of swine, what has been offeredup to other than Allah. But to whoever is forced to eat any of these, neither desiring nor wanting to transgress, Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
And do not say what your tongues falsely describe 'This is lawful, and that is forbidden' in order to forge a lie about Allah. Indeed, those who forge a lie about Allah shall never prosper.
Brief (is their) enjoyment, after which a painful punishment awaits them.
We have forbidden the Jews what We have already related to you. We did not wrong them, but they wronged themselves.
Surely, your Lord to those who commit evil through ignorance and afterwards repent, and mend their ways your Lord thereafter is surely Forgiving, Merciful.
Abraham was (equal to) a nation, obedient to Allah, of pure faith and was not among the idolaters,
ever thankful for His favors. He chose him and He guided him to a Straight Path.
We gave goodness to him in this world, and in the Everlasting Life he shall be amongst the righteous.
Then, We revealed to you: 'Follow the Creed of Abraham, he of pure faith, he was not among the idolaters'
The Sabbath was ordained only for those who differed about it. On the Day of Resurrection, your Lord will decide the differences that were between them.
Call to the Path of your Lord with wisdom and fine admonition. Dispute with them in the best manner. Your Lord is well aware of those who have gone astray from His Path and He is well aware of those who are guided.
If you punish, let your punishment be proportionate to the punishment you received. But if you are patient, it is better for the patient.
Be patient; yet your patience is only by the help of Allah. Do not grieve for them (the unbelievers), nor distress yourself because of their devising.
Allah is with the cautious and those who do good.
