KaafHaYa'aeenSaad.
A mention of the Mercy of your Lord to his worshiper Zachariah,
when he called upon his Lord in secret,
saying: 'O my Lord, my bones are enfeebled, and my head glows silver with age. Yet, never Lord, have I been unblessed in prayer to You.
Indeed, I fear my kinsmen who will succeed me, for my wife is barren. Grant me a kinsman
who will be my heir and an heir to the House of Jacob, and make him, my Lord, satisfied'
'O Zachariah, We give you good tidings of a son, and he shall be called John (Yahya); a name We have never given before'
'How shall I have a son, Lord' he asked, 'when my wife is barren, and I am advanced in years'
He replied: 'It shall be so; your Lord says: "It is easy for Me, indeed, I created you before time when you were not a thing."
He (Zachariah) said: 'Lord, make for me a sign' He replied: 'Your sign is that you shall not speak to people for three nights being without fault'
Then he came out from the Sanctuary to his nation, and gestured to them to exalt (their Lord) at the dawn and at the evening.
(We said): 'O John, hold fast to the Book', and We bestowed on him judgment while yet a child
and tenderness from Us and purity, and he was cautious;
honoring his parents, being neither arrogant nor rebellious.
Peace be upon him on the day he was born and the day he dies, and on him the day when he is raised up alive.
And mention in the Book, Mary, how she withdrew from her people to an eastern place and she took a veil apart from them;
We sent to her Our Spirit (Gabriel) in the resemblance of a perfect human.
(And when she saw him) she said: 'I take refuge in the Merciful from you! If you are fearful'
'I am the Messenger of your Lord' he replied, 'and have come to give you a pure boy'
'How shall I bear a son' she answered, 'when I am not touched by a human and not unchaste'
"Even so" he replied, "as such your Lord has said: 'Easy it is for Me. And We shall make him a sign to mankind and a mercy from Us. It is a matter decreed.'"
Thereupon she carried him, and retired to a far off place.
And when the birthpangs came upon her by the trunk of a palmtree, she said: 'Oh, would that I had died before this and become a thing forgotten'
He called from below to her: 'Do not sorrow, look, your Lord has provided a rivulet below you,
and shake the trunk of this palmtree it will drop fresh ripe dates upon you.
Therefore eat and drink and rejoice with your eyes. If you meet any human say to him: "I have vowed a fast to the Merciful and will not speak with anyone today.'
She came to her nation, carrying him; and they said: 'O Mary, you have committed a monstrous thing.
O sister of Aaron, your father was never an evil man, nor was your mother unchaste'
So she pointed to him (Prophet Jesus). But they replied: 'How can we speak with a baby in the cradle'
He (the baby) said: 'I am the worshiper of Allah. Allah has given me the Book and made me a Prophet.
He made me to be blessed wherever I am, and He has charged me with prayer and charity for as long as I shall live.
(He has made me) kind to my mother; He has not made me arrogant, unprosperous.
Peace be upon me on the day I was born, and on the day I die; and on the day when I shall be raised up alive'
Such was (Prophet) Jesus, the son of Mary. A saying of truth, concerning what they doubt.
It is not for Allah to take a son! Exaltations to Him! When He decrees a thing He only says: 'Be' and it is.
Indeed, Allah is my Lord and your Lord therefore worship Him. That is the Straight Path.
But the parties have fallen into variance among themselves, then woe to those who disbelieve for the scene of a Dreadful Day.
How well they will hear and see on the Day when they come before Us! The evildoers are today in clear error.
Warn them of that Day of Anguish, when the matter is determined whilst heedlessly they disbelieve.
For We shall inherit the earth and all that are on it. To Us, they shall return.
Mention in the Book Abraham; He was truthful and a Prophet.
He said to his father: 'O father, why worship that which can neither see nor hear, nor helps you in anything?
Father, knowledge has come to me which has not come you, therefore, follow me. I will guide you to a Level Path.
Father, do not worship satan; for satan has rebelled against the Merciful.
Father, I fear that the punishment of the Merciful will fall upon you and you will become a guide of satan'
But he replied: 'Do you shrink away from my gods, Abraham? Surely, if you do not cease I will stone you, so leave me for awhile'
'Peace be on you' he (Abraham) said, 'I shall call upon my Lord to forgive you, for to me He has been gracious.
Now I will go away from you and that you call upon, other than Allah. I will call on my Lord. Perhaps I shall not be unblessed in calling my Lord'
So when he turned away from them and those they worshipped, other than Allah, We gave him Isaac and Jacob. Each of them We made a Prophet,
and We gave them of Our Mercy and We appointed to them a truthful, highly sincere tongue,
Mention in the Book, Moses. He was devoted, a Messenger, and a Prophet.
We called out to him from the right side of the mountain, and drew him near in (Divine) conversation.
From Our Mercy We gave him, his brother Aaron, a Prophet.
And mention in the Book, Ishmael; he too was true to his promise, a Messenger and a Prophet.
And he ordered his people to pray and to give charity and his Lord was pleased with him.
And mention in the Book, Idris; he too was of the truth and a Prophet,
We raised him to a high place.
These are whom Allah has blessed among the Prophets from among the seed of Adam and of those whom We bore with Noah; the descendants ofAbraham, of Israel, and of those whom We have guided and chose. For when the verses of the Merciful were recited to them, they fell down prostrate, weeping.
But the generation that succeeded them wasted their prayers and followed their desires, so they shall encounter error
except he who repents and believes and does good works; those shall be admitted to Paradise and shall not be wronged in any way.
(They shall enter the) Gardens of Eden, which the Merciful has promised His worshipers in the Unseen. Indeed, His promise shall come.
There, they shall hear no idle talk, but only peace. And there they shall be given their provision at dawn and at the evening.
That is the Paradise which We shall give the cautious worshipers to inherit.
(Gabriel said:) 'We do not descend except at the command of your Lord. To Him belongs all that is before us and all that is behind us, and all that lies between. Your Lord does not forget.
Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, so worship Him, be patient in His worship. Do you know any that can be named with His Name'
The human says: 'What, when I am dead, shall I be raised to life'
Will the human not remember that We created him before when he was not a thing.
By your Lord, We will gather them and the satans, and We shall parade them hobbling on their knees in Gehenna:
from every party We will pluck out whichever of them was the most hardened in disdain of the Most Merciful.
We alone know who deserves most to be burned therein.
There is not one of you who shall not go down to it: such is a thing decreed, determined by your Lord.
Then, We will save those who were cautious of Us, but the harmdoers shall be left there hobbling on their knees.
When Our clear verses are recited to them the unbelievers say to the believers: 'Which of the two parties has a better position or company'
How many generations have We destroyed before them, who were far greater in riches and more boastful!
Say: 'Whosoever is in error, let the Most Merciful prolong his life span until they see that which they were threatened, be it a punishment, or the Hour. Thenshall they know whose is the worst place and who is weaker in hosts'
Allah will increase those who were guided in guidance and things that abide. Good deeds are better in reward with your Lord, and, better in return.
Have you seen he who disbelieves Our verses and yet says: 'I shall surely be given wealth and children'
Has he gained knowledge of the Unseen? Or taken a covenant with the Merciful?
On the contrary, We will write down what he says and prolong the length of his punishment.
We shall inherit that of which he speaks and he will come before Us alone.
And they have taken gods, other than Allah, that they might be a power from them.
Indeed no! They will renounce their worship and turn against them.
Have you not seen how We send down to the unbelievers satans who prick them?
Therefore, do not hasten (things) against them, for We count out to them a number,
and on the Day when We will ceremonially gather the righteous to the Merciful,
and drive the evildoers as herds, into Gehenna
who have no power of intercession, except those who have taken a covenant with the Merciful.
And they say: 'The Merciful has taken a son'
Surely, you have brought a monstrous thing!
Thereby the heavens are nearly torn and the earth split asunder, and mountains fall crashing down
because they have ascribed a son to the Merciful.
It is not for the Merciful to take a son!
There is none in the heavens and earth except he comes to the Merciful as a worshiper.
He has counted them and exactly numbered all;
and each one shall come to Him on the Day of Resurrection, alone.
Those who believe and do righteous deeds, the Merciful will assign for them love.
We have made it easy in your own tongue in order that you proclaim the glad tidings to the cautious and give warning to a stubborn nation.
How many generations have We destroyed before them! Do you sense even one of them, or hear a whisper from them?
