AlifLaamMeem.
That is the (Holy) Book, where there is no doubt. It is a guidance for the cautious (of evil and Hell).
Who believe in the unseen and establish the (daily) prayer; who spend out of what We have provided them.
Who believe in that which has been sent down to you (Prophet Muhammad) and what has been sent down before you (to Prophets Jesus and Moses) and firmly believe in the Everlasting Life.
These are guided by their Lord; these surely are the prosperous.
Those who disbelieve, whether you forewarn them or not, they will not believe.
Allah has set a seal upon their hearts and ears; their sight is dimmed and for them is a great punishment.
There are some people who say: 'We believe in Allah and the Last Day,'yet they are not believers.
They seek to deceive Allah and those who believe, but they deceive none except themselves, though they do not sense it.
There is a sickness in their hearts which Allah has increased. For them there is a painful punishment because they lie.
When it is said to them, 'Do not corrupt in the land,' they reply, 'We are only reformers.'
But it is they who are the evildoers, though they do not sense it.
When it is said to them: 'Believe as (other) people believe,' they reply, 'Are we to believe as fools believe?' It is they who are the fools, if only they knew!
When they meet those who believe, they say, 'We, too believe.' But when they are alone with their devils, they say to them: 'We follow none but you, we were only mocking
Allah will mock at them and prolong them in sin, blundering blindly.
Such are those who barter away guidance for error, their trade did not profit (them), nor are they guided.
Their example is like one who kindled a fire, and when it lit all around him, Allah took away their light and left them in darkness. They could not see.
Deaf, dumb, and blind, they shall never return.
Or, like (those who, under) a cloudburst from the sky with darkness, thunder and lightning, they thrust their fingers in their ears at the sound of every thunderclap for fear of death, and Allah encompasses the unbelievers.
The lightning almost snatches away their sight, whenever it flashes upon them they walk on, but as soon as it darkens they stand still. Indeed, if Allah willed, He could take away their sight and hearing. Allah has power over all things.
O people, worship your Lord who has created you and those who have gone before you, so that you will be cautious.
Who has made the earth a bed for you and the sky a dome, and has sent down water from the sky to bring forth fruits for your provision. Do not knowingly set up rivals to Allah.
If you are in doubt of what We have sent down to Our worshiper (Prophet Muhammad), produce a chapter comparable to it. Call upon your helpers, other than Allah, to assist you, if you are true.
But if you fail, as you are sure to fail, then guard yourselves against the Fire whose fuel is people and stones, prepared for the unbelievers.
Bear glad tidings to those who believe and do good works. They shall live in Gardens underneath which rivers flow. Whenever they are given fruit as provision they will say: 'This is what we were given before,' for they shall be given in resemblance. Therein they shall have pure spouses, and shall live there for ever.
Allah is not shy to strike a parable whatsoever a gnat or larger. Those who believe know that it is the truth from their Lord. As for those who disbelieve they ask: 'What could Allah mean by this parable? By it, Allah misleads many and guides many.' But He misleads none except the evildoers,
who break the covenant of Allah after accepting it and sever what Allah has bidden to be joined and corrupt in the land. These are the losers.
How can you disbelieve Allah? Did He not give you life when you were dead, and He will cause you to die and then restore you to life. Then you will return to Him.
He created for you all that is in the earth, then, He willed to the heaven, and leveled them seven heavens. He has knowledge of all things.
When your Lord said to the angels: 'I am placing on the earth a caliph,' they replied: 'Will You put there who corrupts and sheds blood, when we exalt Your praises and sanctify You?' He said: 'I know what you do not know'
He taught Adam (father of humans) the names all of them and then presented them to the angels, saying: 'Tell Me the names of these, if you are truthful'
'Exaltations to You,' they replied, 'we have no knowledge except that which You have taught us. You are indeed the Knowing, the Wise'
Then He said to Adam: 'Tell them their names.' And when Adam had named them, He said: 'Did I not tell you that I know the unseen of the heavens and earth, and all that you reveal and all that you hide'
And when We said to the angels: 'Prostrate (to Me) yourselves towards Adam,' they all prostrated themselves except iblis (satan, father of the jinn), who, in his pride refused and became an unbeliever.
To Adam We said: 'Dwell with your wife in Paradise and both eat of it as much as you wish and wherever you will. But neither of you should come close to this tree or else you shall both become transgressors'
But satan made them slip therefrom and caused them to depart from that in which they had been. 'Go down,' We said, 'be enemies to each other. The earth will provide your dwelling place an enjoyment for a while'
Then Adam received Words from his Lord, and his Lord relented towards him. He is the Receiver of Repentance, the Merciful.
'Go down, all together,' We said, 'so if a guidance shall come to you from Me, whosoever follows My guidance no fear shall be on them, neither shall they be saddened.
But those who disbelieve and belie Our verses shall be the companions of the Fire, and there they shall live for ever'
'Children of Israel, remember My favor I have bestowed upon you. Fulfill My covenant, and I will fulfill your covenant with you. Me, you must fear.
And believe in what I have sent down confirming what is with you, and do not be the first to disbelieve it. Do not sell My verses for a little price and fear Me.
Do not confound truth with falsehood, nor knowingly hide the truth while you know.
Establish your prayers, pay the obligatory charity, and bow with those who bow.
Would you order righteousness on others and forget it yourselves? Yet you recite the Book, have you no sense?
And seek help in patience and prayer. For it is heavy, except to the humble,
who reckon that they will meet their Lord and that to Him they will return.
Children of Israel, remember the favors I have bestowed on you, and that I have preferred you (the prophets among you) above the worlds.
Guard yourselves against the Day when no soul can avail a thing to another, when neither intercession nor ransom shall be accepted from it, nor will they be helped.
(Remember) how We saved you from Pharaoh's people who had oppressed you cruelly, slaying your sons and sparing your women. Surely, that was a great trial from your Lord.
We parted the sea for you, and, taking you to safety, drowned the family of Pharaoh before your eyes.
We appointed for Moses forty nights, but in his absence you took the calf, thereby committing harm.
Yet after that We pardoned you, so that you might give thanks.
And when We gave Moses the Book and the Criterion, so that you might be guided;
and when Moses said to his nation: 'My nation, you have harmed yourselves by taking the calf (to worship). So turn in repentance to your Creator and slay yourselves. That will be best for you with your Creator.' And He shall accept you. He is the Receiver of Repentance, the Merciful.
And when you said to Moses: 'We will not believe in you until we see Allah openly' a thunderbolt struck you whilst you were looking.
Then We raised you from your death, so that you might give thanks.
We caused the clouds to cast their shadow over you and sent down for you manna and quails, (saying:) 'Eat of the good things We have provided you. 'Indeed, they did not harm Us, but they harmed themselves.
'Enter this village' We said, 'and eat wherever you will and as much as you wish. Make your way prostrating through the gates, saying: "Unburdening." We shall forgive you your sins and We will increase the gooddoers'
But the harmdoers tampered with Our Words, different from that said to them, and We let loose on the harmdoers a scourge from heaven as a punishment for their debauchery.
(Remember) when Moses prayed for water for his nation, We said to him: 'Strike the Rock with your staff' Thereupon twelve springs gushed from it, and each tribe knew their drinking place. 'Eat and drink of that which Allah has provided and do not act evilly in the land, corrupting'
'Moses' you said, 'we will no longer be patient with one type of food. Call on your Lord to bring forth for us some of the produce of the earth, green herbs and cucumbers, corn, lentils and onions' 'What' he answered, 'Would you exchange that which is lesser for what is better? Go down into Egypt, there you shall find all that you have asked' Humiliation and abasement were pitched upon them, and they incurred the Anger of Allah; because they disbelieved His signs and slew His Prophets unjustly; because they disobeyed and were transgressors.
Those who believe, Jews, Nazarenes and Sabaeans whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day and does good deeds shall be rewarded by their Lord; they have nothing to fear nor are they saddened.
And when We made a covenant with you and raised the Mount above you, (saying) 'Take what We have given you forcefully and remember what is in it, so that you will be cautious'
yet after that you turned away, but for the Grace of Allah and His Mercy you would have surely been among the losers.
You have surely known of those amongst you who transgressed the Sabbath. We said to them: 'Be apes, despised'
We made it a punishment for the former times and for the latter, an exhortation to the cautious.
When Moses said to his nation: 'Allah commands you to slaughter a cow' they replied: 'Are you taking us in mockery' 'I seek protection with Allah lest I should be one of the ignorant' he said.
'Call on your Lord' they said, 'to make known to us what she shall be' He said: "He says she is a cow neither old, nor virgin, middling between both." Therefore, do as you have been ordered'
'Call on your Lord' they said, 'to make known to us what her color shall be' 'Your Lord says: "The cow is yellow, a rich yellow pleasing to the onlookers.'
'Call on your Lord' they said, 'to make known to us which cow she shall be; to us cows look alike. If Allah wills, we shall be guided'
He replied: 'He says: "She is a cow, neither worn out plowing the earth nor watering the field, one kept secure free from any blemish.' 'Now you have brought us the truth' they answered. And they slaughtered her, after they had been reluctant to do so.
And when you slew a soul and then fell out with one another concerning it, Allah made known what you concealed.
We said: 'Strike him with a piece of it' Like this, Allah restores the dead to life and shows you His signs in order that you will understand.
Yet after that your hearts became as hard as rock or even harder. Indeed among the stones are those from which rivers burst. And others split so that water issues from them; and others crash down through fear of Allah. Allah is not inattentive of what you do.
Do you then hope that they will believe in you, when some of them have already heard the Word of Allah and knowingly tampered with it, after they understood it!
When they meet those who believe, they say: 'We are believers' But when alone, they say to their other (chiefs). 'Do you tell to them what Allah has revealed to you so that they will dispute with you concerning it with your Lord? Have you no sense'
Do they not know that Allah has knowledge of all they hide and all that they reveal!
And some of them are common (people) and do not know the Book, but only wishful thoughts, and they are only doubters.
Woe to those who write the Book with their own hands and then say: 'This is from Allah' in order to gain a small price for it. So woe to them for what their hands have written, and woe to them for their earnings.
They say: 'The Fire will never touch us except for a number of days' Say: 'Did Allah make you such a promise for Allah never breaks His promise or do you say about Allah what you do not know'
Indeed, he who earns evil and becomes engrossed in his sin, they are the people of the Fire; in it they shall remain for ever.
But those who believe and do good works are the people of Paradise; for ever they shall live in it.
(Remember) when We made a covenant with the Children of Israel, you shall worship none except Allah. Show kindness to your parents, to kinsmen, to the orphans, and to the needy, and speak of goodness to people. Establish your prayers and pay the obligatory charity. But, except for a few, you all turned your backs and gave no heed.
And when We made a covenant with you, that you shall not shed your blood or turn yourselves out of your dwellings, to this you consented and bore witness.
Yet there you are, slaying your ownselves, and turning a number of them out of their dwellings, and helping each other against them with sin and aggression. Although, should they come to you as captives, you would ransom them. Surely, their expulsion was unlawful. Do you then believe in a part of the Book and disbelieve another! What shall be the recompense of those of you who do that, but degradation in the worldly life, and on the Day of Resurrection to be returned to the most terrible punishment. Allah is not inattentive of what you do.
Such are they who buy the worldly life at the price of the Everlasting Life. Their punishment shall not be lightened, nor shall they be helped.
To Moses We gave the Book and after him We sent other Messengers. We gave (Prophet) Jesus, the son of Mary, veritable signs, and supported him with the Spirit of Purity (Gabriel). Will you then become proud whenever any Messenger comes to you with that which does not suit your fancies, and you belied some (Prophet Jesus) and killed others!
They say: 'Our hearts are covered' But Allah has cursed them for their disbelief. Little is that they believe.
And when a Book came to them from Allah confirming what was with them, while before that they used to pray for victory over the unbelievers when there came to them what they knew, they disbelieved him. Therefore, the curse of Allah be upon the unbelievers!
Evil is that for which they have bartered away their souls, that they disbelieve what Allah has sent down, grudging that Allah should send down from His bounty to whom He chooses from His worshipers! They have incurred wrath over wrath. For the unbelievers there is a humiliating punishment.
When it is said to them: 'Believe in what Allah has sent down' they reply: 'We believe in what was sent down to us' But they disbelieve in what is sent after it, although it is the truth, confirming their own Book. Say: 'Why, before did you kill the Prophets of Allah, if you are believers'
Moses came to you with clear signs, then you took to yourselves the calf after him and you were harmdoers'
When We made a covenant with you and raised the Mount above you (saying): 'Take what We have given you forcefully and hear' they replied: 'We hear, but disobey' For their disbelief, they were made to drink the calf into their very hearts. Say: 'Evil is your belief that orders you to (worship the calf), if you are indeed believers'
Say: 'If the abode of the Everlasting Life is with Allah for you especially, to the exclusion of all other people, then long for death if you are truthful'
But they will never long for it (death), because of what their hands forwarded; and Allah knows the harmdoers.
Indeed, you will find them more eager than other people for this life. And (more than) those who disbelieve. Each one of them wishes to live a thousand years. But his prolonged life will surely not remove him from the punishment. Allah is the Seer of what they do.
Say: 'Whoever is an enemy of Gabriel, indeed, he has brought it down by the permission of Allah to your heart, confirming what was before it and a guidance and glad tidings to the believers.
Whoever is an enemy of Allah, His Angels, His Messengers, Gabriel, and Michael indeed Allah is the enemy of the unbelievers'
We have sent down to you clear verses, none will disbelieve them except the evildoers.
Why, whenever they make a promise do some of them cast it aside! Most of them do not believe.
And now that a Messenger has come to them from Allah confirming what was with them, some of those to whom the Book was given reject the Book of Allah behind their backs, as though they knew nothing
and follow what the devils recited over the Kingdom of Solomon. Solomon did not disbelieve, it is the devils who disbelieved, teaching people magic and that which was sent down upon the angels Harut and Marut in Babylon. They did not teach anyone, until both had said: 'We have been sent as a trial; do not disbelieve' From them they learned how they might separate a husband and his wife. However, they did not harm anyone with it, except by the permission of Allah. Indeed, they learned what harms them and does not profit them, yet they knew that anyone who buys it would have no share in the Everlasting Life. Evil is that for which they have sold their souls, if they but knew!
Had they believed and were cautious, far better for them would be the reward from Allah, if they but knew.
'Believers, do not say 'Observe us (Ra'ina, in Hebrew means evil) ', but instead say: "Look after us (Undhurna), and listen' for the unbelievers is a painful punishment.
The unbelievers among the People of the Book (Jews and Nazarenes) and the idolaters resent that any good should have been sent down to you from your Lord. But Allah chooses whom He will for His Mercy. And Allah is of great bounty.
If We supersede any verse or cause it to be forgotten, We bring a better one or one similar. Do you not know that Allah has power over all things!
Do you not know that it is to Allah that the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth belong, and that there is none, other than Him, to protect or help you!
Would you rather demand of your Messenger that which was once demanded of Moses! He who exchanges belief for disbelief has surely strayed from the Right Path.
Many of the People of the Book wish they might turn you back as unbelievers after you have believed, in envy of their souls, after the truth has been clarified to them. So pardon and forgive until Allah brings His command. Allah is Powerful over everything.
Establish your prayers and pay the obligatory charity. Whatever good you shall forward for your soul you shall find it with Allah. He is the Seer of what you do.
They say: 'None but Jews and Nazarenes shall be admitted to Paradise' Such are their wishful fancies. Say: 'Bring us your proof, if what you say is true'
Indeed, whoever submits his face to Allah and does good works shall be rewarded by his Lord; there they shall have nothing to fear nor shall they be saddened.
The Jews say the Nazarenes are not on anything, and the Nazarenes say it is the Jews who are not on anything. Yet they both read the Book. And those who do not know say like their saying. Allah will judge between them their disputes on the Day of Resurrection.
Who does greater harm than he who prevents His Name to be remembered in the Mosques of Allah and strives to destroy them? Those, they will not enter them except in fear. And for them shame in this world and a great punishment in the next.
To Allah belong the east and the west. Whichever way you turn, there is the Face of Allah. He is the Embracer, the Knower.
They say: 'Allah has taken (to Himself) a son' Exaltations to Him (Allah). For Him is what is in the heavens and the earth, all are obedient to Him.
Creator of the heavens and the earth! When He decrees a thing, He only says: 'Be' and it is.
And those who do not know say: 'Why does not Allah speak to us or a sign come to us' Likewise, those who were before them said similar to their saying. Their hearts are alike. Indeed, We have clarified the signs to a nation who are certain.
We have sent you (Prophet Muhammad) forth with the truth, a giver of glad tidings and a giver of warning. You shall not be questioned about the companions of Hell.
You will please neither the Jews nor the Nazarenes unless you follow their creed. Say: 'The guidance of Allah is the guidance' And if after all the knowledge you have been given you yield to their desires, you shall not have, other than Allah, either a guide or a helper.
Those to whom We have given the Book, and who recite it as it ought to be read, truly believe in it; those who disbelieve it shall be the losers.
Children of Israel, remember My favor which I bestowed upon you and that I preferred your (prophets among you) above the worlds.
And fear a Day when no soul for another will compensate a thing, and no equivalent will be accepted from it, neither intercession will benefit it, nor shall they be helped.
And when Abraham was tested by His Lord with certain words and he fulfilled them, He said: 'I have appointed you as a leader for the nation' (Abraham) asked: 'And of my descendants' 'My covenant' said He, 'the harmdoers shall not receive it'
And when We made the House (Ka'bah) a visitation and a sanctuary for the people (saying:) 'Make the place where Abraham stood a place of prayer. 'And We made a covenant with Abraham and Ishmael: 'Purify My House for those who circumambulate around it, and those who cleave to it, to those who bow and prostrate'
And when Abraham said: 'My Lord, make this country safe and provide its inhabitants whosoever of them believes in Allah and the Last Day with fruits' He said: 'And whosoever disbelieves, to him I shall give enjoyment for a while. Then I shall compel him to the punishment of the Fire, how evil an arrival'
And when Abraham and Ishmael raised the foundations of the House (supplicating): 'O our Lord, accept this from us, You are the Hearer, the Knower.
Our Lord, make us both submissive to You, and of our descendants a submissive nation to You. Show us our rites and accept us; You are the Receiver of Repentance, the Merciful.
Our Lord, send among them a Messenger from them who shall recite to them Your verses and teach them the Book and wisdom, and purify them; You are the Mighty, the Wise'
And who has no desire for the religion of Abraham, except he who fooled himself? We chose him in this world, and in the Everlasting world, he shall be among the righteous.
When his Lord said to him: 'Submit' he answered: 'I have submitted to the Lord of the Worlds'
Abraham charged his children with this, and so did Jacob, saying: 'My sons, Allah has chosen for you the religion. Do not die except being submissive (Muslims)'
Or, were you witnesses when death came to Jacob! He said to his children: 'What will you worship after me' They replied: 'We will worship your God and the God of your forefathers, Abraham, Ishmael, and Isaac, the One God. To Him, we are submissive'
That was a nation that has passed away. Theirs is what they earned, and yours what you have earned. You shall not be questioned about what they did.
They say: 'Be Jews or Nazarenes and you shall be guided' Say: 'No, rather the Creed of Abraham, the upright one. He was not among the idolaters'
Say: 'We believe in Allah and that which is sent down to us, and in what was sent down to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and the tribes; to Moses and Jesus and the Prophets from their Lord. We do not differentiate between any of them, and to Him we are submissive (Muslims)'
If they believe as you have believed they shall be guided; if they reject it, they shall surely be in clear dissension. Allah will suffice you. He is the Hearer, the Knower.
The (indelible) marking of Allah. And who marks better than Allah! And for Him we are worshipers.
Say: 'Would you dispute with us about Allah, who is our Lord and your Lord? Our deeds belong to us and your deeds belong to you. We are sincere to Him'
Or do you say that Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and the tribes, were Jews or Nazarenes! Say: 'Who knows better, you or Allah? Who is more unjust than he who hides a testimony received from Allah? And Allah is not inattentive of what you do'
That nation has passed away. Theirs is what they earned and yours what you have earned. You shall not be questioned about what they did.
The fools among the people will say: 'What has made them turn away from the direction they were facing' Say: 'The east and the west belong to Allah. He guides whom He will to the Straight Path'
And so We have made you a median nation, in order that you will be a witness above the people, and that the Messenger be a witness above you. We did not change the direction that you were facing except that We might know who followed the Messenger from him who turned on both his heels. Though it was a hardship except for those whom Allah has guided. But Allah would never waste your faith. Indeed, Allah is Gentle with people, the Most Merciful.
We have seen you turning your face towards the heaven, We shall surely turn you to a direction that shall satisfy you. So turn your face towards the Sacred Mosque (built by Abraham); wherever you are, turn your faces to it' Those to whom the Book was given know this to be the truth from their Lord. Allah is not inattentive of what they do.
But even if you brought those to whom the Book had been given every proof, they would not accept your direction, nor would you accept theirs; nor would any of them accept the direction of the other. If after all the knowledge you have been given you yield to their desires, then you will surely be among the harmdoers.
Those to whom We gave the Book know him (Prophet Muhammad) as they know their own sons. But a party of them conceal the truth while they know.
The truth comes from your Lord so do not be among the doubters.
And for everyone is a direction for which he turns. So race in goodness. And wherever you are, Allah will bring you all together. He has power over all things.
From wherever you emerge, turn your face towards the Sacred Mosque. This is surely the truth from your Lord. Allah is never inattentive of what you do.
From wherever you emerge, turn your face towards the Sacred Mosque, and wherever you are, face towards it, so that the people will have no argument against you, except the harmdoers among them. Do not fear them, fear Me, so that I will perfect My Favor to you and that you will be guided.
As We have sent among you a Messenger (Prophet Muhammad) from yourselves, to recite to you Our verses and to purify you, who will teach you the Book and Wisdom, and teach you that of which you have no knowledge.
So remember Me, I will remember you. Give thanks to Me and do not be ungrateful towards Me.
Believers, seek assistance in patience and prayer, Allah is with those who are patient.
Do not say that those killed in the Way of Allah are dead, they are alive, although you are unaware.
We shall test you with something of fear and hunger, and decrease of goods, life and fruits. Give glad tidings to the patient,
who, in adversity say: 'We belong to Allah and to Him we shall return'
On those will be prayers and mercy from their Lord, those are guided.
Safah and Marwah are the waymarks of Allah. Whoever performs the pilgrimage to the House or the visit, there shall be no guilt on him to circumambulate between both of them. And whoever volunteers good, Allah is Thankful, the Knower.
Those who hide the clear verses and the guidance We have sent down after We have clarified them in the Book for the people shall be cursed by Allah and cursed by the cursers,
except those who repent, and mend (their deeds) and clarify. Those I shall accept them. I am the Receiver of repentance, the Most Merciful.
But those who disbelieve, and die disbelieving shall incur the curse of Allah, the angels, and all people.
They are there (in the Fire) for eternity neither shall the punishment be lightened for them; nor shall they be given respite.
Your God is One God. There is no god except He. He is the Merciful, the Most Merciful.
In the creation of the heavens and the earth; in the alternation of night and day; in the ships that sail upon the sea with what is beneficial to the people; in the water which Allah sends down from the sky and with which He revives the earth after its death, and He spread in it from each moving (creation); in the movement of the winds, and in the clouds that are compelled between heaven and earth surely, these are signs for people who understand.
And among the people are those who take to themselves rivals, other than Allah, loving them as Allah is loved. But those who believe are more loving to Allah. When the harmdoers see when they see the punishment because the power altogether belongs to Allah, and that Allah is firm in punishment,
when those who were followed disown those who followed, and they see the punishment and relationships are broken off,
those who followed them will say: 'If only that we might return once, and disown them as they have disowned us' As such Allah will show them their own works to be regrets for them, and they shall never emerge from the Fire.
People, eat of what is lawful and good on the earth and do not walk in satan's footsteps, because he is for you a clear enemy,
he orders you to commit evil and indecency and to assert about Allah what you do not know.
When it is said to them: 'Follow what Allah has sent down' they reply: 'We will follow that which we found our fathers upon' even though their fathers did not understand anything and they were not guided.
The likeness of those who disbelieve is as the likeness of he who calls to that which does not hear, except a shout and a voice. Deaf, dumb, and blind, they do not understand.
Believers, eat of the good with which We have provided you and give thanks to Allah, if you really worship Him.
He has forbidden you the dead, blood, and the flesh of swine, also that which is invoked to other than Allah. But whoever is constrained (to eat) any of these, not intending to sin or transgress, incurs no guilt. Allah is Forgiving and the Most Merciful.
Those who conceal what Allah has sent down of the Book and sell it for a small price shall swallow nothing but fire into their bellies. On the Day of Resurrection, Allah will neither speak to them nor purify them. Theirs shall be a painful punishment.
Such are those who buy error for guidance, and punishment for pardon. How patiently they will be in the Fire.
That is because Allah has sent down the Book with the truth; those who disagree about it are in extreme dissension.
Righteousness is not whether you face towards the east or the west. But righteousness is to believe in Allah and the Last Day, in the angels and the Book, and the Prophets, and to give wealth however cherished, to kinsmen, to the orphans, to the needy, to the destitute traveler, and to the beggars, and to ransom the slave; who establish their prayers and pay the obligatory charity; who are true to their promise when they have promised. Who are patient in misfortune and hardship and during the time of courage. Such are the truthful; such are the cautious.
Believers, retaliation is decreed for you concerning the killed. A free (man) for a free (man), a slave for a slave, and a female for a female. He who is pardoned by his brother, let the ensuing be with kindness, and let the payment be with generosity. This is an alleviation from your Lord and mercy. He who transgresses thereafter shall have a painful punishment.
O owners of minds, for you in retaliation is life, in order that you be cautious.
Written for any of you when death arrives, if he leaves behind goods, is the will for his parents and relatives with kindness. This is a duty incumbent on the cautious.
Then, if anyone changes it after hearing it, the sin shall rest upon those who change it. Allah is Hearing and Knowing.
He who fears injustice or sin on the part of a testator and brings about a settlement among the parties incurs no guilt. Allah is the Forgiver and the Most Merciful.
Believers, fasting is decreed for you as it was decreed for those before you; perchance you will be cautious.
(Fast) a certain number of days, but if any one of you is ill or on a journey let him (fast) a similar number of days later on; and for those who are unable (tofast), there is a ransom the feeding of a needy person. Whosoever volunteers good, it is good for him; but to fast is better for you, if you but knew.
The month of Ramadan is the month in which the Koran was sent down, a guidance for people, and clear verses of guidance and the criterion. Therefore, whoever of you witnesses the month, let him fast. But he who is ill, or on a journey shall (fast) a similar number (of days) later on. Allah wants ease for you and does not want hardship for you. And that you fulfill the number of days and exalt Allah who has guided you in order that you be thankful.
When My worshipers ask you about Me, I am near. I answer the supplication of the suppliant when he calls to Me; therefore, let them respond to Me and let them believe in Me, in order that they will be righteous.
Permitted to you, on the night of the Fast, is the approach to your wives; they are raiments for you, as you are raiments for them. Allah knows that you have been deceiving yourselves. He has accepted and pardoned you. Therefore, you may now touch them and seek what Allah has ordained for you. Eat and drink until the white thread becomes clear to you from a black thread at the dawn. Then resume the fast till nightfall and do not touch them while you cleave to the mosques. These are the Bounds of Allah, do not come near them. As such He makes known His verses to people so that they will be cautious.
Do not consume your wealth between you in falsehood; neither propose it to judges, in order that you sinfully consume a portion of the people's wealth, while you know.
They question you about the crescents. Say: 'They are times fixed for people and for the pilgrimage' Righteousness does not consist in entering dwellings from the back. But righteousness is he who wardsoff (sin). Enter dwellings by their doors and fear Allah, so that you will prosper.
Fight in the way of Allah those who fight against you, but do not aggress. Allah does not love the aggressors.
Kill them wherever you find them. Drive them out of the places from which they drove you. Dissension is greater than killing. But do not fight them by the Holy Mosque unless they attack you there; if they fight you, kill them. Like this is the recompense of the unbelievers,
but if they desist, know that Allah is the Forgiver and the Most Merciful.
Fight against them until there is no dissension, and the religion is for Allah. But if they desist, there shall be no aggression except against the harmdoers.
The sacred month for the sacred month, prohibitions are (subject to) retaliation. If any one aggresses against you, so aggress against him with the likeness of that which he has aggressed against you. Fear Allah, and know that Allah is with the cautious.
Spend in the way of Allah and do not cast into destruction with your own hands. Be gooddoers; Allah loves the gooddoers.
Fulfill the pilgrimage and make the visitation for Allah. If you are prevented, then whatever offering that may be easy. And do not shave your heads until the offerings have reached their destination. But if any of you is ill or suffers from an ailment of the head (scalp), he must pay a ransom either by fasting or by the giving of charity, or by offering a sacrifice. When you are safe, then whosoever enjoys the visitation until the pilgrimage, let his offering be that which may be easy, but if he lacks the means, let him fast three days during the pilgrimage and seven when he has returned, that is, ten days in all. That is for him whose family is not present at the Holy Mosque. And fear Allah and know that He is firm in inflicting punishment.
The pilgrimage is in the appointed months. (For) whosoever undertakes the pilgrimage there is no approaching (women), neither transgression nor disputing in the pilgrimage. Allah is Aware of whatever good you do. Provide well for yourselves, the best provision is piety. Fear Me, O owners of minds.
It shall be no offense for you to seek the bounty of your Lord. When you surge on from Arafat, remember Allah as you approach the Holy Mountain of Mash'ar. Remember Him as it is He who guided you though before that you were amongst the astray.
Then surge on from where the people surge and ask Allah for forgiveness. He is Forgiving and the Most Merciful.
And when you have fulfilled your sacred duties remember Allah as you remember your forefathers or with deeper reverence. There are some who say: 'Lord, give us good in this world' He shall have no share in the Everlasting Life.
But there are others who say: 'Lord, give us a merit in the world and good in the Everlasting Life, and save us from the punishment of the Fire'
These shall have a share of what they have earned. Swift is the reckoning of Allah.
Remember Allah during counted days. Whosoever hastens on in two days, no sin shall be on him. And if any delay, no sin shall be on him, for he who wardsoff (evil). And fear Allah, and know that you shall be assembled unto Him.
There is he whose sayings pleases you in this worldly life and uses Allah as a witness for what is in his heart, but he is most stubborn in adversary.
No sooner does he leave than he hastens about the earth to corrupt there and destroy crops and cattle. Allah does not love corruption.
When it is said to him: 'Fear Allah' egotism takes him in his sin. Gehenna (Hell) shall be enough for him. How evil a cradling!
But there are among people he who would give away his life desiring the Pleasure of Allah. Allah is Gentle to His worshipers.
Believers, all of you, enter the peace and do not follow in satan's footsteps; he is a clear enemy to you.
If you lapse back after the clear verses that have come to you, know that Allah is the Almighty, the Wise.
Are they waiting for Allah to come to them in the shadows of the clouds with the angels! Their matter will have been settled then. To Allah shall all things return.
Ask the Children of Israel how many clear signs We have given them. Whoever changes the Favor of Allah after it has come to him, Allah is Firm in inflicting the punishment.
For those who disbelieve, the worldly life is decked with all manner of decorations. They scoff at those who believe, but the cautious shall be above them on the Day of Resurrection. Allah gives without count to whom He will.
The people were one nation. Then Allah sent forth Prophets to give them glad tidings and to warn them; and with them He sent down the Book with the truth, that He might rule between the people in that which they differ. Only those to whom it had been given differed about it after the clear verses had come to them, transgressing between themselves. Then Allah guided those who believed concerning that which they were at variance in the truth, by His permission. Allah guides whom He will to the Straight Path.
Or did you suppose that you would go to Paradise untouched by that endured by those before you! Affliction and adversity befell them; and they were shaken until the Messenger, and those who believed with him, said: 'When will the victory of Allah come' Is it not so that the victory of Allah is near.
They will question you about what they should spend (in charity). Say: 'Whatever good you spend is for (your) parents, kinsmen, orphans, the needy, and the destitute traveler. Allah is Aware of whatever good you do'
(Offensive) fighting is obligatory for you, though it is hateful to you. But you may hate a thing although it is good for you, and may love a thing although it is evil for you. Allah knows, and you do not.
They ask you about the Sacred Month and fighting in it. Say: 'To fight in this month is a grave (offense); but to bar others from the Path of Allah, and disbelief in Him, and the Holy Mosque, and to expel its inhabitants from it is greater with Allah. Dissension is greater than killing' They will not cease to fight against you until they force you to renounce your religion, if they are able. But whosoever of you recants from his religion and dies an unbeliever, their works shall be annulled in this world and in the Everlasting Life, and those shall be the companions of Hell, and there they shall live for ever.
But those who believe and those who migrate and struggle in the way of Allah, those, have hope of the Mercy of Allah. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
They ask you about intoxicating drink and gambling. Say: 'There is great sin in both, although they have some benefit for people; but their sin is far greater than their benefit' They ask you what they should spend. Say: 'That which remains' So, Allah makes plain to you His verses, in order that you will reflect
upon this world and the Everlasting Life. They will question you concerning orphans. Say: 'Doing good for them is best. If you mix their affairs with yours, remember they are your brothers. Allah knows the corrupter from the reformer. If Allah willed He could have brought hardship upon you. He is Almighty and Wise'
Do not wed idolatresses, until they believe. A believing slavegirl is better than a (free) idolatress, even if she pleases you. And do not wed idolaters, until they believe. A believing slave is better than a (free) idolater, even though he pleases you. Those call to the Fire; but Allah calls to Paradise and pardon by His permission. He makes plain His verses to the people, in order that they will remember.
They ask you about menstruation. Say: 'It is an injury. Stay away from women during their menstrual periods and do not approach them until they are cleansed. When they have cleansed themselves, then come to them from where Allah has commanded you. Allah loves those who turn to Him in repentance and He loves those who cleanse themselves'
Women are your planting place (for children); come then to your planting place as you please and forward (good deeds) for your souls, and fear Allah. And know that you shall meet Him. Give glad tidings to the believers.
Do not make Allah a deterrent through your oaths, that you be righteous, cautious, and reform between people. Surely, Allah is Hearing and Knowing.
Allah will not call you to account for a slip in your oaths. But He will take you to task for that which is intended in your hearts. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
For those who swear a wait of four months from their women, if they revert, Allah is Forgiving, the Most Merciful.
But if they resolve on divorce, surely, Allah is the Hearer, the Knower.
Divorced women shall wait by themselves for three periods. It is unlawful for them, if they believe in Allah and the Last Day, to hide what He has created in their wombs, in which case their husbands would have a better right to restore them should they desire reconciliation. And for them similar to what is due from them with kindness. But men have a degree above them. Allah is Mighty and Wise.
Divorce is twice, then an honorable keeping or allowed to go with kindness. It is unlawful for you to take from them anything you have given them, unless both fear that they will not be able to keep within the Bounds of Allah; in which case it shall be no offense for either of them if she ransom herself. These are the Bounds of Allah; do not transgress them. Those who transgress the Bounds of Allah are harmdoers.
If he divorces her (for the third time), she shall not be lawful to him after that until she has wed (not for the purpose of remarrying her former husband) another spouse and then if he divorces her it shall be no offense for either of them to return to each other, if they think that they can keep within the Bounds of Allah. Those are the Bounds of Allah. He makes them plain to people who know.
When you have divorced women and they have reached the end of their waiting period, either keep them in kindness or let them go with kindness. But you shall not keep them, being harmful, in order to transgress. Whoever does this wrongs himself. Do not take the verses of Allah in mockery. Remember the favor of Allah upon you, and what He sent down to you from the Book and Wisdom to exhort you. Fear Allah and know that He has knowledge of everything.
When you divorce women, and they have reached their term, do not restrain them from marrying their (future) husbands, when they have agreed together with kindness. That is an exhortation for whosoever of you believes in Allah and the Last Day. That is cleaner and purer for you. Allah knows, and you do not know.
Mothers shall suckle their children for two years completely, for whoever desires to fulfill the suckling. It is for the father to provide for them and clothe them with kindness. No soul is charged except to its capacity. A mother shall not be harmed for her child, neither a father for his child. And upon the heir is like that. If both desire to wean by mutual consent and consultation, then no guilt shall be on them. And if you desire a wet nurse for your children, then no guilt shall be on you if you hand over what you have given with kindness. And fear Allah, and know that Allah is the Seer of what you do.
And those of you who die and leave wives behind such wives shall wait by themselves for four months and ten (nights). When they have reached the end of their waiting period, there shall be no offense for you in whatever they choose for themselves kindly. Allah is Aware of what you do.
No guilt shall be on you in the indication of an engagement to women or what you suppress in yourself. Allah knows that you will remember them; but do not promise them secretly unless you speak kind words (only of indication). And do not resolve on the knot of marriage until the writing has reached its term. And know that Allah knows what is in your hearts, so be cautious of Him. And know that Allah is the Forgiver, the Clement.
It shall be no offense for you to divorce your wives as long as you have not touched them or obligated a right for them. Provide for them with fairness; the rich according to his means, and the restricted according to his. A right on the gooddoers.
If you divorce them before you have touched them but after their dowry has been determined, give them half of what you determined, unless they pardon, or he pardons in whose hand is the marriage knot. And if you pardon it is nearer to wardingoff (evil). Do not forget the generosity between each other. Allah is the Seer of what you do.
And preserve the prayers and the middle prayer, and stand obedient to Allah.
And if you fear, then (pray) on foot or riding. But when you are safe, then remember Allah, as He has taught you what you did not know.
Those who die and leave wives behind should bequeath to them a year's maintenance without causing them to leave their homes; but if they leave, no blame shall be attached to you in what they do with themselves kindly. Allah is Mighty and Wise.
Provision should be made for divorced women with kindness. That is a right on the cautious.
Like this Allah clarifies to you His verses in order that you understand.
Haven't you seen those who went out from their homes in their thousands cautious of death? Allah said to them: 'Die' and then He revived them. Surely, Allah is Bountiful to the people, but most people do not thank.
Fight in the way of Allah. And know that Allah is the Hearer and the Knower.
Who is he that will lend Allah a good loan! He will multiply it many multiples! Allah grasps and outspreads and to Him you shall be returned.
Have you not seen the congregation of the Children of Israel who demanded of one of their Prophets after (the death of) Moses? 'Raise up for us a king' they said, 'and we will fight in the way of Allah' He replied: 'Might it be that if fighting is written for you, you will not fight' 'Why shouldn't we fight in the way of Allah' they replied, 'when we and all our children have been driven from our dwellings' Yet, when fighting was written for them all except for a few, turned away. And Allah has knowledge of the harmdoers.
Their Prophet said to them: 'Allah has raised Saul to be your king' But they replied: 'Should he be given the kingship over us, when we are more deserving of it than he and he has not been given abundant wealth' He said: 'Allah has chosen him over you and increased him with amplitude in knowledge and body. Allah gives His kingship to whom He will. Allah is the Embracer, the Knower'
Their Prophet said to them: 'The sign of his kingship is the coming of the Ark to you, therein shall be tranquility from your Lord, and a remnant which the House of Moses and the House of Aaron left behind. It will be borne by the angels. That will be a sign for you if you are believers'
And when Saul marched out with his army, he said: 'Allah will test you with a river. He who drinks from it shall cease to be one of mine but he who does not drink from it, except he who scoops up once with his hand, shall be of mine' But for a few of them, they all drank from it. And when he had crossed it with those who believed, they said: 'We have no power this day against Goliath and his soldiers' But those of them who reckoned they would meet Allah replied: 'Many a small band has, by the permission of Allah, vanquished a mighty army. Allah is with the patient'
When they appeared to Goliath and his soldiers, they said: 'Lord, pour upon us patience. Make us firm of foot and give us victory against the nation of unbelievers'
By the permission of Allah, they routed them. David slew Goliath, and Allah bestowed on him the kingship and wisdom, and taught him from that He willed. Had Allah not pushed the people, some by the other, the earth would have been corrupted. But Allah is Bountiful to the worlds.
These are the verses of Allah. We recite (them) to you in truth, for you (Prophet Muhammad) are one of the Messengers.
Of these Messengers, We have preferred some above others. To some Allah spoke; and some He raised in rank. We gave (Prophet) Jesus, the son of Mary, clear signs and strengthened him with the Spirit of Purity (Gabriel). Had Allah willed, those who succeeded them would not have fought against one another after the clear verses came to them. But they differed among themselves; some believed, and others disbelieved. Yet had Allah willed, they would not have fought against one another. Allah does whatever He will.
Believers, spend of what We have given you before that Day arrives when there shall be neither trade, nor friendship, nor intercession. It is the unbelievers who are the harmdoers.
Allah, there is no god except He, the Living, the Everlasting. Neither dozing, nor sleep overtakes Him. To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth. Who is he that shall intercede with Him except by His permission! He knows what will be before their hands and what was behind them, and they do not comprehend anything of His Knowledge except what He willed. His Seat embraces the heavens and the earth, and the preserving of them does not weary Him. He is the High, the Great.
There is no compulsion in religion. Righteousness is now distinct from error. He who disbelieves in the idol and believes in Allah has grasped the firmest tie that will never break. Allah is Hearing, Knowing.
Allah is the Guardian of those who believe. He brings them out from darkness into the light. As for those who disbelieve, their guides are idols, they bring them out from the light into darkness. They are the companions of the Fire and shall live in it for ever.
Have you not seen he who argued with Abraham about his Lord that Allah had given him the kingship! When Abraham said: 'My Lord is He who revives, and causes to die' He said: 'I revive, and cause to die' Abraham said: 'Allah brings up the sun from the east; so you bring it from the west' Then he who disbelieved became pale. Allah does not guide the nation, the harmdoers.
Or of him, who, when passing by the ruined village that was fallen on its roofs, remarked: 'How can Allah give life to this after its death' Thereupon Allahcaused him to die, and after a hundred years He revived him. He asked: 'How long have you remained' 'A day' he replied, 'or part of a day' Allah said: 'Rather, you have remained a hundred years. Look at your food and drink; they have not rotted. And look at your donkey (that had died). We will make you a sign to the people. And look at the bones (of your donkey) how We shall revive them and clothe them with flesh' And when it had all become clear to him, he said: 'I know that Allah has power over all things'
And (remember) when Abraham said: 'Show me, Lord, how You raise the dead' He replied: 'Have you not believed' 'Rather' said Abraham, 'in order that my heart be satisfied' 'Take four birds' said He, 'draw them to you, then set a part of them on every hill, then call them, they will come swiftly to you. Know that Allah is Mighty and Wise'
The example of those who give their wealth in the way of Allah is like a grain of corn that sprouts seven ears, in every ear a hundred grains. Allah multiplies to whom He will, Allah is the Embracer, the Knower.
Those who spend their wealth in the way of Allah and do not follow their spending with reproach and insults shall be rewarded by their Lord; they shall have nothing to fear or to regret.
A kind word and forgiveness is better than charity followed by injury. Allah is the Clement.
Believers, do not annul your charitable giving with reproach and hurt, like he who spends his wealth to show off to the people and believes neither in Allah nor in the Last Day. His likeness is as a smooth rock covered with dust, if a heavy rain strikes it, it leaves it bare. They have no power over what they have earned. Allah does not guide the nation, the unbelievers.
But those who give away their wealth with a desire to please Allah and to reassure themselves are like a garden on a hillside, if heavy rain strikes it, it yields up twice its normal crop, and if heavy rain does not strike it, then light rain. Allah is the Seer of what you do.
Would any one of you, being welladvanced in age with helpless children, wish to have a garden of palmtrees, vines and all manner of fruits watered by running streams struck and burned by a fiery whirlwind? Even so, Allah makes plain to you His signs, in order that you give thought.
Believers, spend of the good you have earned and of that which We have brought out of the earth for you. And do not intend the bad of it for your spending; while you would never take it yourselves, except you closed an eye on it. Know that Allah is Rich, the Praised.
satan promises you with poverty and orders you to commit what is indecent. But Allah promises you His Forgiveness and bounty from Him. Allah is the Embracer, the Knower.
He gives wisdom to whom He will, and he who is given wisdom has been given a lot of good. Yet none will remember except the owners of minds.
Whatever you spend and whatever vows you make are known to Allah. The harmdoers shall have none to help them.
If you reveal your charity it is good, but to give charity to the poor in private is better and will acquit you from some of your evil deeds. Allah is Knowledgeable of what you do.
It is not for you (Prophet Muhammad to cause) their guidance. Allah guides whom He will. Whatever good you spend is for yourselves, provided that you give it desiring the Face of Allah. And whatever good you spend shall be repaid to you in full, you shall not be harmed.
(Charity is) for the poor who are restrained in the way of Allah, and are unable to journey in the land. The ignorant take them to be rich because of their abstinence. But you can recognize them by their signs. They do not persistently beg people. Whatever good you give is known to Allah.
Those who spend their wealth by day and by night, in private and in public, their wage is with their Lord, and no fear shall be on them, neither shall they sorrow.
Those who consume usury shall not rise up (from their tomb) except as he who rises in madness that satan has touched. That is because they say: 'Selling is like usury' Allah has permitted trading and forbidden usury. To whomsoever an exhortation comes from his Lord then he desists, he shall have his past gains, and his matter is with Allah. But whoever reverts shall be among the people of the Fire and shall remain in it for ever.
Allah effaces usury and nurtures charity. Allah does not love any ungrateful sinner.
Those who believe and do good works, establish the prayers and pay the obligatory charity, will be rewarded by their Lord and will have nothing to fear or to regret.
Believers, fear Allah and give up what is still due to you from usury, if you are believers;
but if you do not, then take notice of war from Allah and His Messenger. Yet, if you repent, you shall have the principal of your wealth. Neither will you harm nor will you be harmed.
If he should be in hardship, then a postponement until ease; while if you give charity it is better for you if you know.
Fear the Day when you shall be returned to Allah. And every soul shall be paid in full what it has earned; and they shall not be harmed.
Believers, when you contract a debt for a fixed period, put it in writing. Let a scribe write it down between you with fairness; no scribe shall refuse to write as Allah has taught him. Therefore, let him write; and let the debtor dictate, fearing Allah his Lord, and do not decrease anything of it. If the debtor is a fool, or weak, or unable to dictate himself, let his guardian dictate for him in fairness. Call to witness two witnesses of your men, if the two are not men, then a man and two women from the witnesses whom you approve; so that if one of the two errs, one of them will remind the other. Whenever witnesses are called upon they must not refuse, and do not be weary to write it down, be it small or large, together with its term. This is more just with Allah; it ensures accuracy in testifying and is the least of doubt. Unless it is present merchandise that you circulate between you; then no guilt shall be on you if you do not write it down and take witnesses when you are selling, and let no harm be done to either scribe or witness. If you do, that is a transgression in you. Fear Allah. Allah teaches you, and Allah has knowledge of everything.
If you are upon a journey and a scribe cannot be found, then let pledges be taken. If any of you trusts another let the trusted deliver his trust; and let him fear Allah his Lord. And you shall not conceal the testimony. He who conceals it, his heart is sinful. Allah has knowledge of what you do.
To Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth. Whether you reveal what is in your hearts or hide it Allah will bring you to account for it. He will forgive whom He will and punish whom He will; He has power over all things.
The Messenger believes in what has been sent down to him from His Lord, and so do the believers. Each believes in Allah and His Angels, His Books, and His Messengers, we do not differentiate between any one of His Messengers. They say: 'We hear and obey. (We ask) Your forgiveness Lord, and to You is the arrival.
Allah charges no soul except to its capacity. For it is what it has earned, and against it what it has gained. 'Our Lord, do not take us to account if we have forgotten, or made a mistake. Our Lord, do not burden us with a load as You have burdened those before us. Our Lord, do not over burden us with more than we can bear. And pardon us, and forgive us, and have mercy on us. You are our Guide, so give us victory over the nation, the unbelievers.'
