Prosperous are the believers,
who are humble in their prayers;
who turn away from idle talk;
who give charity,
who guard their privates,
except with their wives and what their right hand possess, and then they are not blamed.
Those who seek beyond that are transgressors.
(Prosperous are those) who preserve their trusts and pledges
and those who observe their prayers.
Those are the heirs
who will inherit Paradise; they shall live there for ever.
We created the human from an essence of clay:
then We made him, a drop, in a secure receptacle (the womb).
Then We created of the drop, a clot (of congealed blood) and We created the clot into bitesize tissue, then We created the bitesize tissue into bones, thenWe clothed the bones with flesh, and then produced it an other creation. Blessed is Allah, the Best of creators!
After that you shall surely die,
and be resurrected on the Day of Resurrection.
We have created seven ways above you; of Our creation, We are never inattentive.
We sent down water from the sky in due measure, and lodged it in the earth, and We are able to take it all away.
With it, We produced for you gardens of palms and vines, yielding abundant fruit for you to eat.
Also, a tree which grows on the Tor of Sinai and gives oil and relish for its eaters.
In the cattle, too, is a lesson for you. We let you drink of that which is in their bellies, and there are many benefits in them for you, and you eat of them,
and upon them and on the ships you are carried.
We sent Noah to his nation. 'Worship Allah, my nation' he said, 'for you have no god except He. Will you not be cautious'
The unbelieving assembly of his nation said: 'This is but a human like you, who desires to gain superiority over you. Had Allah willed, He could have sent down angels. We never heard of this among our ancient forefathers.
He is nothing else except a man who is mad, so watch him for awhile.
He (Noah) said: 'Lord, help me, for they belie me'
We said to him: 'Make the Ark under Our Eye, and Our Revelation, and then when Our command comes and the oven gushes water, take onboard a pair from every kind and your family, except him against whom the decision has already been passed. Do not address Me concerning those who have done evil; they shall be drowned.
And when you and all those with you are seated in the Ark, say: 'Praise be to Allah who has saved us from the harmdoing nation'
And say: 'Lord, let me land a blessed landing. You are the Best of harborers'
Surely, in that are signs, and surely We will put (nations) to the test.
Then We produced after them another generation
and We sent to them a Messenger from themselves, saying: 'Worship Allah, for you have no god except He. Will you not be cautious'
The unbelieving assembly of his nation, who belied the encounter of the Everlasting Life, and on whom We had bestowed ease in this life, said: 'This is but a human like yourselves; he eats of what you eat and drinks of what you drink.
If you obey a mortal like yourselves, you shall be lost.
What, does he promise you that when you are dead and turned to dust and bones, you will be brought forth?
After, after with that which you are promised!
There is nothing but our present life; we die, and we live, and we shall not be resurrected.
He is nothing but a man who has forged against Allah a lie, we will never believe him'
He said: 'Help me, Lord, they belie me'
He replied: 'Before long, by the morning, they shall be remorseful'
And the Cry seized them in justice and We made them withered. So begone with the harmdoing nation.
After them We produced other generations
no nation outstrips its term, nor do they put it back.
Then We sent Our Messengers in succession. Yet whenever its Messenger came to a nation they belied him, so We made them follow others, and We made them but as tales, so begone the nation who did not believe!
Then We sent Moses and his brother Aaron with Our signs and clear authority
to Pharaoh and his Council, but they were very proud, and they were a tyrannical nation.
'What' they said, 'are we to believe in two mortals like us, whose nation are our worshipers'
So they belied them, and they were among the destroyed.
And We gave Moses the Book, in order that they might be guided.
We made the son of Mary and his mother a sign, and gave them a refuge on a hillside where there was a hollow and a spring.
Messengers! Eat of that which is good and do good deeds; I have knowledge of the things you do.
Your nation is but one nation, and I am your Lord, therefore fear Me.
Yet they have split their affairs between themselves into sects, each rejoicing in what it has.
Leave them in their perplexity for a time.
Do they think that in giving them wealth and children
We hasten in good works for them? No, they are not aware.
Those who tremble in fear of their Lord,
who believe in the verses of their Lord;
who associate none with their Lord,
who give what they give, with their hearts quaking, that they will return to their Lord:
those, hasten in good works, outracing to them.
We charge no soul with more than it can bear. We have a Book with Us which speaks the truth, and they shall not be wronged.
But their hearts are in ignorance of this (Koran); and they have deeds besides that which they are doing.
But when We seize with the punishment those of them that live in ease, they groan.
(We shall say): 'Do not groan today, surely you shall receive no help from Us'
My verses were recited to you, but you turned upon your heels,
being proud against it, talking foolishness by night.
Should they not think upon the saying? Or, did anything come upon them that had not come upon their ancient forefathers?
Or, is it because they do not recognize their Messenger that they denied him?
Do they say he is mad! No, he came to them with the truth, but most of them hate the truth.
Had the truth followed their fancies, the heavens, the earth, and all who live in them would have surely been corrupted. No, We brought them theirRemembrance; but from their Remembrance they turn away.
Or, do you ask a tribute from them? Your Lord's tribute is better. He is the Best of providers.
Indeed you are calling them to a Straight Path,
but those who disbelieve in the Everlasting Life deviate from the Path.
If We had mercy on them and removed their afflictions, they would still persist in their insolence, blindly wandering.
Already We have seized them with the punishment, but they neither humbled themselves to their Lord, nor did they beseech Him,
when We opened on them a gate of severe punishment, they utterly despaired.
It was He who produced for you hearing, eyes, and hearts, yet little is that you thank.
It was He who scattered you on the earth, and before Him you shall be gathered.
It is He who revives and makes to die, and to Him belong the alternation of the night and the day. Will you not understand!
No, but they said what the ancients said before them:
'When we are dead and become dust and bones shall we be resurrected?
We and our fathers have been promised this before. It is but of the ancients' fictitious tales'
Say: "If you have knowledge, 'to whom belongs the earth' and, 'whoever is in it? '"
They will say: 'To Allah' Say: 'Then will you not remember'
Say: 'Who is the Lord of the seven heavens, and of the Great Throne'
They will say: 'Allah' Say: 'Will you not be cautious'
Say: 'In whose Hands is the Kingdom of all things, He protects, and none protects against Him, if you have knowledge'
'Allah' they will reply. Say: 'How then can you be so bewitched'
No, We have brought the truth to them, but they are liars.
Allah has not taken to Himself any son, there is no other god with Him. Were this otherwise each god would have taken that which he created, and some ofthem would have risen above others; Exalted is Allah beyond that they describe!
(He is) the Knower of the Unseen and the Seen, High Exalted be He above that they associate.
Say: 'Lord, if You should show me that which they are promised,
O my Lord, do not put me among the harmdoing people'
Indeed, We are able to show you that which We promised them.
Repel evil with that which is better. We know that which they describe.
And say: 'O my Lord, I seek refuge in You from evil suggestions of the satans.
O my Lord, I seek refuge in You lest they attend me'
Until, when death comes to one of them he says: 'My Lord, let me go back,
that I should do righteousness in that I forsook' No! It is only a word which he will speak. Behind them there shall stand a barrier till the Day that they shall be resurrected.
And when the Horn is blown, on that Day their ties of kindred shall be no more, nor will they ask each other.
Those whose scales are heavy shall prosper,
but those whose scales are light shall forfeit their souls and live in Gehenna (Hell) for ever.
The fire lashes their faces and therein are shriveled lips.
(We shall say): 'Were My verses not recited to you, and did you not belie them'
'Lord' they will reply, 'adversity prevailed over us and we were erring.
Our Lord, bring us out of it. If we return (to sin), then we shall indeed be harmdoers'
He will say: 'Slink there in it and do not speak to Me'
Among My worshipers there were a party who said: "Lord, we believed. Forgive us and have mercy on us: You are the Best of the merciful."
But you took them for laughingstock, mocking at them, until they caused you to forget My remembrance.
Today I shall recompense them for their patience, for it is they that have won.
And He will ask: 'How many years did you live on earth'
They will reply: 'A day, or part of a day; ask those who have kept count'
He will say: 'You have tarried a little, did you know?
Did you think that We had created you only for play, and that you would never be returned to Us'
High Exalted be Allah, the King, the Truth. There is no god except He, the Lord of the Noble Throne.
Whosoever calls upon another god, other than Allah, having no proof his reckoning will be with his Lord. The unbelievers shall never prosper.
And say: 'My Lord, forgive and have mercy, for You are the Best of the merciful'
