TaSeenMeem.
Those are the verses of the Clear Book.
We shall in truth recite to you some of the news of Moses and Pharaoh for a nation who believe.
Pharaoh had exalted himself in the land and had divided its people into sects, one group he abased, putting their sons to death and sparing their women, for he was one of those who corrupted.
But We wanted to be gracious to those abased in the land, and to make them leaders and inheritors,
and to establish them in the land; and to show Pharaoh and Haman, and their armies, the very thing they dreaded.
We revealed this to Moses' mother: 'Suckle him, but when you fear for him cast him into the water. Neither fear, nor sorrow because We shall restore him to you and make him among the Messengers'
Then the family of Pharaoh picked him out to be an enemy and a sorrow for them, indeed Pharaoh and Haman, and their army were sinners.
Pharaoh's wife said to him: 'He will be a comfort to me and you. Do not slay him, perhaps he may benefit us, or we will take him for our son' But they were unaware.
In the morning the heart of Moses' mother became empty. She would have revealed (who he was) had We not settled her heart so that she might be among the believers.
She said to his sister: 'Follow him' And she watched him from a distance, but they were unaware.
We had forbidden to him before that he should be suckled by foster mothers, therefore she (Moses' sister) said (to them): 'Shall I direct you to a people of a household who will take charge of him for you and advise him'
So, We restored him to his mother, so that she might be comforted and not sorrow, and that she might know that the promise of Allah is true. Yet most of them do not know.
And when he was full grown, and reached the perfection of his strength, We gave him judgment and knowledge. As such We recompense the gooddoers.
And he entered the city unnoticed by the people and found two men fighting, one was of his own party, and the other of his enemies. The one of his party appealed for his help against his enemy, Moses struck and killed him, and said: 'This is the work of satan, he is surely a clear, misleading enemy.
Forgive me, my Lord, for I have wronged myself' and so He forgave him; for He is indeed the Forgiving, the Most Merciful.
He said: 'My Lord as You have favored me, I will never be a helper to the wrongdoer'
In the morning, he was in the city, fearful and vigilant, then he whom he had helped the day before cried out to him again for help. 'Clearly' said Moses, 'you are quarrelsome'
And when Moses was about to seize he who was the enemy of both of them, he said: 'Moses, would you kill me as you killed a living soul yesterday? You desire only to be a tyrant in the land, and you do not want to be among the reformers'
Then a man came running from the furthest part of the city, 'Moses' he said, 'the Assembly are plotting to kill you. Leave, for I am one of your sincere advisers'
So he left, fearful and vigilant, saying: 'My Lord, save me from the harmdoing nation'
And when he turned his face towards Midian, he said: 'It may be that my Lord will guide me on the right way'
When he came to the water wells of Midian he found there some people drawing water, and he found two women apart from them who were keeping back (their flocks). 'What is your business' he asked. They replied: 'We cannot draw water until the shepherds have driven away (their flocks), and our father is an elderly man'
So he drew water for them and then retired to the shade, saying: 'O my Lord, surely I have need of whatever good You send me'
Then, one of the two came to him walking shyly, and said: 'My father invites you, so that he can recompense you with a wage for having drawn water for us.' So when he came to him and told him his story, (the father) said: 'Do not be afraid, you have been saved from the nation of harmdoers'
One of the two women said: 'Father, hire him. The best who you can hire, is the strong, the honest'
He said: 'I will let you marry one of these two daughters of mine on condition that you hire yourself to me for eight years. If you complete ten that is of your own accord; I shall not press you. Surely, you will find me, if Allah wills, among the good'
'So be it between me and you' said Moses. 'Whichever of the two terms I fulfill, it will be no injustice to me. Allah is the Guardian of what we say'
And when Moses had fulfilled the term and departed with his household, he saw from far away on the side of the Tor a fire. He said to his household: 'Stay here, for I can see a fire. Perhaps I can bring you news, or a flame from the fire so that you can warm yourselves'
When he came to it, he was called from the right bank in the blessed plot of the tree (he heard speech without letter or voice coming from all directions):'Moses, I am Allah, Lord of the Worlds.
Cast down your staff' And when he saw his staff writhing as though it were a serpent, he turned about in retreat, and did not turn back. 'O Moses, approach and have no fear. You are surely safe.
Put your hand in the neck (of your shirt), it will come out luminous, unharmed, and draw your arm to you so that you are not afraid. These are two signs from your Lord to Pharaoh and his Assembly. Surely, they were an impious nation.'
'My Lord' (said Moses), 'I have killed a living soul among them, and fear that they will slay me.
Aaron my brother has a more eloquent tongue than I, (please) send him with me as a helper to confirm I speak truly, I fear that they will belie me'
He said: 'We will strengthen your arm with your brother, and appoint for you both an authority so that they shall not reach you. With our signs you and those who follow you shall be the victors.
And when Moses came to them with Our clear signs, they said: 'This is nothing but forged sorcery. We have never heard of this among our fathers, the ancients.'
Moses replied: 'My Lord knows well who brings guidance from Him and who shall possess the Last Residence. The harmdoers will not prosper'
'Assembly' said Pharaoh, 'I do not know that you have any god except me' 'O Haman, kindle a fire upon clay and make me a tower so that I can climb to see the God of Moses, I think that he is one of the liars'
He and his hosts became wrongfully proud in the land and they thought that they would never be returned to Us.
Therefore, We seized him and his hosts, and cast them into the sea. See how was the end of the harmdoers.
We made them leaders inviting to the Fire, and on the Day of Resurrection they shall not be victors.
In this world We laid Our curse on them, and on the Day of Resurrection they shall be among the exiled.
And We gave Moses the Book, after We had destroyed the former generations, to be reflections for people and a guidance, and a mercy in order that they might remember.
(Prophet Muhammad) you were not on the western side (of the mountain) when We decreed the commandment to Moses, nor were you among thosewitnessing.
We raised generations who lived long. You did not live among the people of Midian, nor did you recite to them Our verses; but We were sendingMessengers.
You were not present on the side of the Tor when We called. Yet as a mercy from your Lord to warn a nation to whom no warner has been sent before, in order that they remember
and not say, when evil befalls them on account of that which their hands forwarded: 'Our Lord, why did You not send a Messenger to us so that we might follow Your verses and so that we might be among the believers'
So when the truth (Prophet Muhammad) came to them from Us, they said: 'Why is he not given the like of that which was given to Moses' But did they not also disbelieve in that which Moses was given before! They say (about Moses and Aaron): 'Two sorcerers supporting one another' And they said: 'We disbelieve both'
Say: 'If what you say is true, bring down from Allah a Book that is a better guidance than both, I will follow it'
If they do not answer you, know that they are only following their desires. And who is further astray than he who is led by his desires without guidance fromAllah! Allah does not guide the harmdoers.
We have brought them the Word in order that they remember.
Those to whom We gave the Book before, believe in it.
When it is recited to them, they say: 'We believe in it, because it is the truth from Our Lord. We surrendered ourselves before it came.
'Their wage shall be given them twice, because they have endured patiently, averting evil with good and spending from what We have given them;
and because when they hear idle talk they turn away from it and say: 'We have our deeds, and you have your deeds. Peace be upon you. We do not desire the ignorant'
You cannot guide whom you please; it is Allah who guides whom He will. He knows well those who are guided.
They say: 'If we follow the guidance with you, we shall be driven from our land' But have We not given them a secure sanctuary from which fruits of every kind are collected as a provision from Us? Indeed, most of them do not know.
How many a village have We destroyed that were ungrateful in their life! Those are their dwellings, (they are) uninhabited after them except for a little; We are the inheritors.
Nor did your Lord destroy the villages until He had sent a Messenger to its mother village reciting to them Our verses. We never destroyed villages unless their inhabitants were harmdoers.
The things you have been given, and its adornments, are but the enjoyment of this present life. What is with Allah is better and everlasting. Do you not understand?
Is he to whom We promised a fine promise and receives it, like he who has been given the enjoyment of this present life, then on the Day of Resurrection shall be among those that are arraigned?
On that Day He will call to them, saying: 'Where are those whom you alleged to be My associates'
Those against whom the Word is realized shall say: 'Our Lord, those whom we led astray, we led them astray even as we ourselves were astray. We are quit of them to You; it was not us that they worshipped'
It will be said to them: 'Call on your associates' And they will call on them, but they will not respond to them, and they shall see the punishment if only they had been guided.
On that Day He will call to them and He will say: 'What response did you give Our Messengers'
And on that Day the news will be blinded for them, and they will not ask each other.
But, as for he who repents and believes, and does good deeds, he will be among those who prosper.
Your Lord creates whosoever He will and He chooses the choice was not theirs (the unbelievers). Exalted is Allah, above that they associate!
Your Lord knows what their chests hide and what they reveal.
And He is Allah; there is no god except He. The Praise is His in the former as in the latter. His is the Judgement, to Him you shall be returned.
Say: 'Think! What if Allah should enshroud you in unceasing night till the Day of Resurrection, what god, other than Allah, shall bring you light! Will you not hear?'
Say: 'What would you think if Allah should make the day unceasing over you till the Day of Resurrection, what god, other than Allah, shall bring you the night to sleep in. Will you not see'
In His Mercy He has appointed for you the night and the day, so that you can rest in it, and seek His bounty, in order that you will be thankful'
Upon that Day He will call to them saying: 'Now, where are those whom you alleged to be My associates'
From every nation We will bring a witness, and We shall say to them: 'Produce your proof' Then they shall know the truth is with Allah, and their own fabrications will forsake them.
. Korah was one of Moses' nation. But he was insolent to them, for We had given him such treasures that their very keys were too heavy a burden for even the strong. His people said to him: 'Do not exult; Allah does not love the boastful.
But seek, in that which Allah has given you to attain the Everlasting residence. Do not forget your share in this world. Do good, as Allah has been good to you, and do not corrupt in the land, Allah does not love those who corrupt.
But he replied: 'What was given me is only because of the knowledge I possess' Did he not know that from the generations before him Allah had destroyed a mightier and more numerous in multitude? The sinners shall not be questioned about their sins.
So he went out in all his finery among his nation, those who desired this life said: 'Would that we had the like of that Korah has been given! He has indeed a mighty fortune'
But those to whom knowledge had been given said: 'Alas for you! Better is the reward of Allah for him who believes and does good works; but none shall receive it except the patient'
We caused the earth to swallow him, together with his dwelling, and there was no host to help him, other than Allah; and he was not amongst the victorious.
And in the morning those who had wished to be in his place the previous evening said: 'Indeed, Allah outspreads to whom He will among His worshipers, and He restrains. Had He not shown us favor, He could have caused the earth to swallow us. Indeed, the unbelievers shall never prosper'
That is the Last Abode, We shall assign it to those who desire neither exorbitance in the earth, nor corruption. The outcome is for the cautious.
Whosoever does a good deed shall have better than it. But whosoever does evil deeds, they shall be recompensed for what they were doing.
He who has obligated the Koran will bring you to an appointment. Say: 'My Lord knows well who comes with guidance, and who is in clear error'
You did not hope that the Book would be given to you except as mercy from your Lord. So do not be a supporter of the unbelievers.
Let no one bar you from the verses of Allah after they have been sent down to you, but call to your Lord, and do not be amongst the idolaters.
And do not call upon another god with Allah, there is no god except He. All things perish, except His Face, Judgement is His, and to Him all of you shall return.
