AlifLaamMeem.
Do people think that they are left alone by saying: 'We are believers' and will not be tried?
We tried those who have gone before them. Allah knows those who are truthful and those who lie.
Or do the evildoers think that they will outstrip Us? How evil is their judgment!
He who hopes to meet Allah (must know) that the term of Allah is coming. He is the Hearer, the Knower.
He who strives, strives for himself. Allah is the Rich, independent of the worlds.
As for those who believe and do good works, We shall acquit them of their sins, and recompense them with the best for what they were doing.
We have charged the human to be kind to his parents. But if they bid you to associate with Me that which you have no knowledge, do not obey them. To Me you will return, and I shall inform you of all that you have done.
Those who believe and do good works shall be admitted among the righteous.
There are some people who say: 'We believe in Allah' yet when such is hurt in the cause of Allah, he makes the persecution of people as though it were the punishment of Allah. But then if help comes from his Lord, he will say: 'We were with you' Does Allah not know what is in the (people's) chests of the worlds?
Most certainly Allah knows the believers and the hypocrites.
The unbelievers say to those who believe: 'Follow our path, and we will carry your sins' Yet they cannot carry even a thing of their sins. They are surely lying.
They shall certainly carry their loads, and other loads besides their loads, and on the Day of Resurrection, they shall be questioned about what they forged.
Indeed, We sent Noah to his nation, and he lived amongst them for a thousand years, less fifty (but they belied him), then the Flood seized them while they were harmdoers.
But We saved him and all who were in the Ark, and made (the event) a sign to the worlds.
And (remember) Abraham. When he said to his people 'Worship Allah and fear Him. That would be best for you, if you but knew.
You only worship, other than Allah, idols and invent falsehoods. Those whom you worship, other than Allah, have no power to give you provision. Therefore seek the provision of Allah, and worship Him. Give thanks to Him, to Him you shall return'
If you belie me, other nations before you also belied. It is only for a Messenger to deliver the clear deliverance.
Do they not see how Allah originates the Creation, and then brings it back? That is an easy matter for Allah.
Say: 'Travel in the land and see how He started the Creation. Then Allah will originate the Everlasting Life. Allah has power over all things.
He punishes whom He will and has mercy to whom He will. To Him you shall be turned.
You are not able to frustrate Him either in the earth or heaven, nor have you, other than Allah, a guardian or helper.
Those who disbelieve the verses of Allah and the meeting with Him shall despair of My Mercy, for them there awaits a painful punishment.
The only answer his nation gave was that they said: 'Kill him, or burn him! 'But Allah saved him from the fire. Surely, in this there are signs for a nation who believe.
He said: 'Other than Allah, you have taken to yourselves idols as an affection between yourselves in the present life. Then, on the Day of Resurrection, you shall deny one another and curse one another, and your refuge will be the Fire, and none shall help you'
Lot believed him, and said: 'I will migrate to my Lord; He is the Almighty, the Wise'
And, We gave him (Abraham), Isaac and Jacob and appointed on his descendants the Prophethood and the Book. We gave him his wage in this world, and in the Everlasting Life he shall be among the righteous.
And Lot who said to his nation: 'You commit indecency which no other being in all the world has committed before you.
What, do you approach men and cause a detour on the road, and commit dishonor (sodomy) in your assembly' But the only reply of his nation was: 'Then bring down the punishment of Allah, if what you say is true'
'My Lord' he said, 'help me against this corrupt nation'
And when Our Messengers brought Abraham the glad tidings they said: 'We are destroying the people of this village, because its people are harmdoers'
He said: 'Lot is in it' They replied: 'We know who are in it, we shall save him and his family, except his wife, she has become of those that shall remain behind'
And when Our Messengers came to Lot, he was troubled and distressed on their account. But they said: 'Have no fear, and do not be sad. Surely, we will save you and your family except your wife, she has become of those that shall remain behind'
We shall send down anger out of heaven upon the people of this city because they are debauchers.
Indeed, We left a clear sign for a nation that understands.
And to Midian their brother Shu'aib. He said: 'Worship Allah, my nation. Look to the Last Day. Do not make mischief in the land, doing corrupt works.
But they belied him, so the earthquake seized them, and when morning came, they were found fallen crouched in their dwellings, dead.
Aad and Thamood, it has become clear to you from their dwellings; satan made their works seem fair to them and barred them from the Path, although they saw clearly.
And Korah, Pharaoh, and Haman Moses came to them with clear signs, but they became very insolent in the earth, yet they did not outstrip Us.
Each of them We seized for his sin. On some We loosed a squall of pebbles, and others were seized by the Cry. Some We caused to be swallowed up by the earth, and some We drowned. Allah would never wrong them but they wronged themselves.
The likeness of those who have taken guardians, other than Allah, is as the likeness of the spider that takes to itself a house; surely the spider's house is the weakest house if they but knew.
Allah knows whatever they call upon other than Him; He is the Almighty, the Wise.
And We strike these parables for the people, but none understands except the knowledgeable.
Allah has created the heavens and the earth with the truth. Surely, in that there is a sign for believers.
Recite what has been sent down to you of the Book, and establish the prayer. Prayer forbids indecency and dishonor. The remembrance of Allah is greater, and Allah knows what you do.
And do not dispute with the People of the Book (Nazarenes) except in the best manner, except for those among them who do wrong and say (to them): 'We believe in that which was sent down to us and that which was sent down to you. Our God and your God is One, and to Him we have surrendered'
As such, We have sent down to you the Book. Those to whom We gave the Book believe in it, and so do some of these. None reject Our verses except the unbelievers.
Never before did you recited any Book, or inscribe it with your right hand. If you had done so, those who follow falsehood would have doubted.
No, rather they are clear verses in the chests of those who have been given knowledge. None disbelieves Our verses except the harmdoers.
They ask: 'Why has not a sign been sent down upon him from his Lord' Say: 'The signs are only with Allah. I am only a clear warner'
Is it not enough for them that We have sent down to you the Book that is recited to them? Surely, in this there is a mercy and a reminder to a nation who believe.
Say: 'Allah suffices as a witness between me and you. He knows whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth. Those who believe in falsehood and disbelieve in Allah those are they who are the losers'
They demand that you hasten the punishment! But had it not been for the stated term, the punishment would come to them; it will come upon them suddenly when they are unaware.
They demand that you hasten on the punishment! Gehenna (Hell) will encompass the unbelievers.
On the Day the punishment shall cover them from above them and from beneath their feet, He shall say: 'Taste now what you were doing'
O My worshipers who believe, My earth is vast, therefore worship Me!
Every soul shall taste death, and to Us you shall be returned.
Those who believe and do good deeds We shall lodge them in the rooms of Paradise underneath which rivers flow, therein living for ever, an excellent wage for those who labor,
those who are patient, and put their trust in their Lord.
How many a beast does not bear its own provision. Allah provides for it, as (He provides) for you. He is the Hearer, the Knower.
If you ask them: 'Who has created the heavens and the earth and subjected the sun and the moon' They will say: 'Allah' How perverted they are!
Allah outspreads and restricts His provision to whomsoever He will of His worshipers. Allah has knowledge of all things.
If you were to ask them: ''Who sends down water out of the sky and thereby revives the earth after it was dead' they will reply: 'Allah' Say: 'Praise, belongs to Allah' No, but most of them do not understand.
The life of this world is nothing but a diversion and play. Indeed, the Everlasting Residence is the Eternal Life, if they but knew.
When they embark upon ships, they call to Allah making their religion sincerely His; but when He brings them safe to the land, they associate others with Him
showing ingratitude for what We have given them and take their enjoyment; soon they shall know!
Do they not see how We appointed a safe Sanctuary while all around them people are snatched away? Would they believe in falsehood and do they disbelieve in the favor of Allah!
And who does greater evil that he who forges a lie against Allah or belied the truth when it comes to him! Is there not a lodging in Gehenna for the unbelievers?
Those who struggle in Our cause, We will surely guide them to Our ways; and Allah is with those who do good.
