AlifLaamMeem.
The Romans have been defeated (by the Persians)
in a land close by. But, in a few years after their defeat they shall become the victors.
To Allah belongs the Command before and after, and on that Day the believers will rejoice
in the victory of Allah. Allah gives victory to whosoever He will, and He is the Mighty, the Merciful.
The promise of Allah! Allah does not fail His promise, yet most people do not know.
They know an outward part of this life, but of the Everlasting Life they are inattentive.
Have they never thought to themselves that Allah did not create the heavens and the earth and all that is between except with truth, and for a stated term? Yet most people disbelieve that they will ever meet their Lord.
What, have they never journeyed in the land and seen what was the end of those before them? They were stronger in might than themselves, and they plowed the land and cultivated it more than they themselves have cultivated it. And to them, their Messengers came with clear signs, and Allah did not wrong them, but they wronged themselves.
Evil was the end of the harmdoers, because they belied the verses of Allah and mocked at them.
Allah originates creation, then brings it back again, then to Him you shall be returned.
On the Day when the Hour comes, the wrongdoers will be speechless.
They shall have none to intercede for them amongst their associates, and they shall disbelieve in their associates.
On the Day when the Hour has come, they will be divided,
those who believe and did good deeds shall be well pleased in a garden,
but those who disbelieved and belied Our verses and the meeting of the Everlasting Life, shall be arraigned for punishment.
Therefore, exalt Allah when you enter the evening and in the morning.
His is the praise in the heavens and the earth, at the setting sun and at noon.
He brings out the living from the dead, and the dead from the living. He revives the earth after its death. Likewise you shall be brought forth.
And of His signs is that He created you from dust and you became humans scattered throughout the earth.
And of His signs is that He created for you wives from among yourselves, that you might reside with them, and has put kindness and mercy between you. Surely, there are signs in this for those who think.
And His signs are the creation of heavens and earth and the diversity of your tongues and colors. Surely, there are signs in this for all the worlds.
And of His signs is that you sleep at night and day, and seek His bounty. Surely, there are signs in this for those who hear.
And of His signs is that He shows you the lightning for fear and hope. He sends down water from the sky and with it He revives the earth after its death. Surely, in this there are signs for a nation that understand.
And of His signs is that the heaven and earth stand firm at His command. And when He calls you once out of the earth, you shall come forth.
To Him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth. All are obedient to His Will.
It is He who originates the creation, and then brings it back again, that is easier for Him. For Him is the Highest Example in the heavens and earth He is the Almighty, the Wise.
He sets for you an example, drawn from yourselves. Do you have from among those whom your right hand possesses associates in what We have given you, who share it equally with you? Do you fear them as you fear one another? So We made plain Our signs to a nation of understanding.
No, the wrongdoers follow their own desires without knowledge. And who can guide those whom Allah has led astray? There shall be none to help them.
Therefore set your face to the religion purely, the upright creation upon which He originated people. There is no changing of the creation of Allah. This is the valuable religion, although most people do not know?
turning to Him. And fear Him, establish the prayer and do not be of the idolaters,
those who have divided their religion, and become sects, each rejoicing in what they have.
When affliction befalls mankind they turn to Him calling their Lord in prayer, but when He lets them taste His Mercy, some of them assign associates to their Lord,
disbelieving in what We have given them. Enjoy, but you shall soon know.
Or have We sent down to them an authority that speaks of that they associate with Him?
When We give people a taste of mercy, they rejoice in it, but when evil befalls them through the forwarding of their own hands, they become despondent.
Do they not see that Allah outspreads and restricts His provision to whom He will? Surely, there are signs in this for those who believe.
And give to the kinsman his due, and to the needy, and to the destitute traveler. That is best for those who desire the Face of Allah; such will surely prosper.
That which you give in usury so that it increases in other people's wealth, will not increase with Allah; but the charity you give desiring the Face of Allah, to those, they shall be recompensed many times over.
It is Allah who has created you and given you your provision. He will cause you to die, and will then revive you. Can any of your associates do any of that? Exalted is He above what they associate.
Corruption has appeared on land and sea with what the hands of the people earned. Therefore, they taste some of what they did in order that they return.
Say: 'Journey in the land and see what was the end of those who were before you. Most of them were idolaters'
Therefore in purity set your face to the religion, before there comes from Allah a Day that cannot be turned back. On that Day mankind will be separated.
Those who disbelieve will be charged for their disbelief, while the righteous are making provision for themselves
so that He will recompense those who believe and do righteous deeds from His bounty. He does not love the unbelievers.
And of His signs is that He looses the winds as bearers of glad tidings, so that He lets you taste His Mercy and that the ships may sail at His command in order that you can seek His bounty and be thankful.
Before you We sent other Messengers to their people; and they came with clear signs. We took revenge upon the sinners, and it was an incumbent duty upon Us to give victory to the believers.
It is Allah who looses the winds that stir the clouds. He spreads them as He will in heaven and disperses them, so that you can see the rain falling from their midst. When He smites with it whom He will of His worshipers they rejoice,
though before its coming they had despaired.
Look then at the marks of Mercy of Allah; how He revives the earth after its death. He is the Reviver of the dead. He has power over all things.
Yet if We sent a wind so they see it yellow, indeed after that they would still be unbelievers.
You cannot make the dead hear you, nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they retreat, turning about.
You cannot guide the blind out of their error. Nor shall you make any to hear except those who believe in Our verses, and are submissive.
Allah creates you weak; after weakness He gives you strength and after strength weakness and gray hairs. He creates whatever He will. He is the Knower, the Capable.
Upon the Day when the Hour has come, the harmdoers will swear that they had stayed no more than an hour. As such they are deceived.
But those to whom knowledge and belief have been given will say: 'You have stayed in the Book of Allah (the Protected Tablets) till the Day of Resurrection. This is the Day of Resurrection, yet you did not know'
On that Day, excuses shall not benefit the harmdoers, nor shall they be asked to make amends.
In this Koran We have set forth for mankind all manner of examples. Yet if you bring to them a sign the unbelievers will surely say: 'You are but falsifiers'
As such Allah seals the hearts of those who do not know.
Therefore, have patience. The promise of Allah is true. Do not let those who are uncertain make you unsteady.
