YaSeen.
By the Wise Koran,
you (Prophet Muhammad) are truly among the Messengers sent
upon a Straight Path.
The sending down of the Mighty, the Most Merciful
so that you may warn a people whose fathers were not warned, and so were heedless.
The Phrase has become obligatory upon most of them, yet they do not believe.
We have bound their necks with fetters up to their chin, so that their heads are raised and cannot be lowered.
We have set a barrier before them and a barrier behind them, and, We have covered them so that they do not see.
It is the same whether you have warned them or you have not warned them, they do not believe.
You only warn he who follows the Remembrance and fears the Merciful in the Unseen. Give to him glad tidings of forgiveness and a generous wage.
Surely, it is We who revive the dead and write down what they have forwarded and what they have left behind; We have counted everything in a Clear Book.
Give to them a parable; to the people of the village there came Messengers,
We sent to them two, but they belied them so We reinforced them with a third. They said: 'We have surely been sent as Messengers to you'
But they said: 'You are only humans like ourselves. The Merciful has not sent down anything, your speech is but lies'
They said: 'Our Lord knows that we are Messengers to you.
And it is only for us to deliver a Clear Message'
They answered: 'We predict evil of you. If you do not desist, we will stone you and a painful punishment from us will befall you'
They said: 'Your prediction is with you, if you are reminded. Surely, you are but a wayward nation'
Then, a man came running from the furthest part of the village 'My nation' he said, 'follow the Messengers,
follow those who ask no wage of you and are rightly guided.
Why should I not worship Him who has originated me and to whom you shall all be returned?
What, shall I take, other than Him, gods whose intercession, if the Merciful desires to afflict me, cannot help me at all, and they will never save me?
Surely, I should then be in clear error.
I believe in your Lord, so hear me'
It was said (to him): 'Enter Paradise' and he said: 'Would that my people knew
that my Lord has forgiven me, and caused me to be amongst the receivers of generosity'
And We did not send down to his nation after him any army from heaven, neither would We send any down.
It was only one Shout and they were silent, still.
Woe, for those (unbelieving) worshipers! They mocked every Messenger that came to them.
Have they not seen how many generations We destroyed before them? They shall never return to them,
all shall be arraigned before Us.
The dead land is a sign for them. We revive it, and from it produce grain from which they eat.
And there We made gardens of palms and vines, and in it We caused fountains to gush forth,
so that they might eat of its fruit and the labor of their hands. Will they not give thanks?
Exaltations to Him who created pairs of all the things the earth produces and of themselves, and that of which they have no knowledge.
A sign for them is the night. From it We withdraw the day and they are in darkness.
The sun runs to its fixed restingplace; that is the decree of the Almighty, the Knower.
And the moon, We have determined it in phases till it returns like an old palmbranch.
The sun shall not outstrip the moon, nor shall the night outstrip the day. Each is floating in an orbit.
And a sign for them is that We carried their offspring in the laden Ark (of Noah).
And We have created for them the like of it in which they board.
We drown them if We will, then they have none to cry to, nor can they be saved,
except through Our Mercy and as enjoyment for awhile.
When it is said to them: 'Have fear of that which is before you and behind you in order that you find mercy'
Yet there never comes to them any sign of their Lord's signs, but they turn away from it.
And when it is said to them: 'Spend of that which Allah has given you' the unbelievers say to the believers: 'Are we to feed those whom Allah can feed if He chooses? Surely, you are only in clear error'
They also say: 'When will this promise be, if what you say is true'
They await but one Shout, which will seize them while they dispute.
Then they will be unable to make a will, nor shall they return to their kinsmen.
And the Horn is blown, and, from the graves they rush forth to their Lord.
'Woe for us' they will say. 'Who has roused us from our sleepingplace? This is what the Merciful promised; the Messengers have spoken the truth'
And it is but one Shout and they are all arraigned before Us.
Today, no soul shall be wronged a thing. You shall not be recompensed except according to your deeds.
Indeed, the companions of the Garden are this Day busy in their rejoicing.
Together with their spouses, they shall recline on couches in the shade.
They shall have fruits and all that they call for.
Peace, a saying from the Most Merciful Lord.
(And He will say): 'Distance yourselves, O sinners, this Day.
Children of Adam, did I not make a covenant with you, that you should not worship satan he is surely a clear enemy to you
and that you worship Me? Surely, that is the Straight Path.
Yet he has led many a host of you astray, did you not understand?
This, then is Gehenna (Hell), that which you were promised.
Roast well therein this Day for you were unbelievers'
This Day We set a seal on their mouths and their hands speak to Us, and their feet will testify to their earnings.
Had it been Our will We would have obliterated their sight so that they raced to the Path. But, how would they see?
Had it been Our will We would have transmuted them (into monkeys, pigs and stones) where they were, so that they could neither go forward nor yet return.
To whoever We give a long life We make him stoop. Do they not understand?
We have not taught him (Prophet Muhammad) poetry, nor does it become him. This is only a Remembrance and a Clear Holy Reading (Koran)
that he may warn the living, and so that Judgement may be passed against the unbelievers.
Have they not seen how We have created for them the cattle they master with Our Hands?
We have subdued these to them, and some of them they ride and some of them they eat;
they also have other uses in them and drinks. What, will they not give thanks!
And yet they have taken gods, other than Allah, so that they might helped!
They cannot help them, for them (the socalled) army are brought (with them to Hell).
So do not let their sayings grieve you. Surely, We have knowledge of what they hide and all that they reveal.
Has the human not seen how We created him from a drop (of sperm)? Yet he is a clear opponent.
And he has struck for Us a parable, and forgotten his own creation. He asks: 'Who will quicken the bones after they have decayed'
Say: 'He will quicken them who originated them the first time; He has knowledge of every creation;
who has made fire for you from the green tree with which you kindle'
Is He who created the heavens and the earth unable to create their like? Yes, indeed, He is the Creator, the Knower.
When He wills a thing, His command is to say to it 'Be', and it is!
Exaltations to Him in whose Hand is the Kingdom of all things, and to Him you will be returned.
