By the aligners (angels) aligning.
and the drivers driving,
and those who recite the Remembrance
surely, your God is One,
the Lord of the heavens and the earth and of all that is between them; the Lord of the Easts.
We have adorned the lower heaven with the adornment of the planets,
a protection against every rebel satan;
so they cannot listen to the High Assembly, for they are pelted from every side.
They are rejected and theirs is an everlasting punishment;
except such as snatches a fragment, and he is pursued by a piercing flame.
So ask them, are they stronger in constitution, or those whom We have created. We have created them of sticky clay.
No, you marvel, while they scoff.
When they are reminded, they do not remember.
When they are shown a sign, they scoff at it
and say: 'This is nothing but clear sorcery'
What, when we are dead and become dust and bones, shall we be resurrected.
What, and our forefathers, the ancients'
Say: 'Yes, but worthless'
It will be but one Shout, then see, they are watching
and they will say: 'Woe for us. This is the Day of Recompense'
This is the Day of Decision which you belied.
Gather together the evildoers, their wives, and that they were worshipping,
other than Allah, and guide them to the Path of Hell!
And halt them so that they may be questioned.
'Why do you not help one another?
No, today they will resign themselves in submission,
and approach each other with questions,
saying: 'You used to come to us from the right hand'
But they reply: 'Rather, you were not believers.
We had no authority over you, but you were an insolent nation.
The statement of Our Lord is realized against us, and we are tasting it,
we perverted you, indeed, we were perverts'
Therefore, on that Day they will all share Our punishment.
As such We shall deal with the evildoers.
For when it was said to them: 'There is no god except Allah' they were always proud
and said: 'Are we to renounce our gods for the sake of a mad poet'
No, indeed, he has brought the truth, and confirmed the Messengers.
You shall certainly taste the painful punishment:
but you shall not be recompensed except for what you were doing.
But for the sincere worshipers of Allah,
there is waiting for them a known provision;
fruits. And they are receivers of generosity
in the Gardens of Delight,
sitting face to face upon couches,
a goblet from a spring shall be passed round to them
white, a delight to the drinkers,
there is neither sickness in it, nor intoxication.
And with them will be maidens (houris) who restrain their wide glances
as if they were hidden pearls.
They will go to one another asking each other questions.
One of them will say: 'I had a companion
who would say: "Are you among the believers (of the resurrection)?
When we are dead and turned to dust and bones, shall we be recompensed?"
And he will reply: 'Are you looking down (into Hell)'
Then, he will look and see him in the midst of Hell.
'By Allah' he will say, 'you almost destroyed me!
But for the Favor of Allah I should have surely been among those who were arraigned (with you in Hell).
What then, shall we not die
except our first death, and shall we not be punished'
Indeed, this is the mighty victory,
and for the like of this let the workers work.
Is this a better hospitality or the tree of AzZakkum!
We have made this (tree) a trial for the evildoers.
It is a tree that grows from the bottom of Hell;
its spathes are like the heads of satans
on it they shall feed, and with it they shall fill their bellies.
On top of it they shall have a brew of boiling water,
then their return is to Hell.
They found their fathers in error,
yet they run in their footsteps,
yet before them most of the ancients went astray,
though We had sent among them warners.
See then the end of those who were warned,
except the sincere worshipers of Allah.
Noah called to Us, and We are the Best to answer.
We saved him and his people from the great distress,
and We made his offspring the survivors.
And We let it remain upon him in the latter:
'Peace be upon Noah among all the worlds'
As such We recompense the gooddoers,
he was one of Our believing worshipers.
Afterwards We drowned the others.
Of his party was Abraham.
(Remember when) he came to his Lord with a pure heart;
and when he said to his father and to his nation: 'What do you worship?
It is falsehood that you desire gods other than Allah!
What do you think of the Lord of the Worlds'
He cast a glance at the stars
and said: 'Surely, I am sick (of what you worship)'
But they turned their backs and went away from him.
Then he turned to their gods, and said: 'What do you eat?
What is the matter with you, that you do not speak'
And he turned upon them striking them with the right hand.
Thereafter they (the people) came to him in haste.
He said: 'Do you worship what you, yourselves have carved
when it is Allah who created you and all that you do'
They replied: 'Build for him a building and cast him into the fire'
Their desire was to outwit him, but We made them to be the humiliated.
He said: 'I will go to my Lord; He will guide me.
My Lord, grant me a righteous (son)'
And We gave him the glad tidings of a very gentle son (Ishmael).
And when he reached the age of traveling with him, he said: 'My son, while I was sleeping I saw that I shall slaughter (sacrifice) you, tell me what is your opinion' He replied: 'Father, do as you are ordered (by Allah). Allah willing, you shall find me one of those who are steadfast'
And when they had both submitted, and his son had laid down prostrate upon his forehead,
We called to him, saying: 'O Abraham,
you have confirmed your vision' As such We recompense the gooddoers.
That was indeed a clear trial.
So, We ransomed him with a mighty sacrifice,
and We let it (the beautiful praise) remain upon him in the latter (generations),
'Peace be upon Abraham'
As such We recompense the gooddoers.
He was one of Our believing worshipers.
Then, We gave him the glad tidings of Isaac, a Prophet, one of the righteous,
and We blessed him and Isaac, and from their offspring are some gooddoers, and others who clearly wronged themselves.
We also favored Moses and Aaron
and We saved them with their nation from a great distress.
We helped them, and they became victorious,
and We gave them the Clear Book,
and guided them upon the Straight Path.
And We let it (the beautiful praise) remain upon on both of them in the latter (generations),
'Peace be upon Moses and Aaron'
As such We recompense the gooddoers.
They were among Our believing worshipers.
And Elias (El Yaseen) was among the Messengers.
He asked his people: 'Do you not fear (Allah)?
Do you call on Ba'lan (the idol Baal) and abandon the Best Creator,
Allah is your Lord and the Lord of your fathers, the ancients'
But they belied him, so they will be among the arraigned (in Hell),
except the sincere worshipers of Allah.
And We let it (the beautiful praise) remain upon him in the latter (generations),
'Peace be upon El Yaseen'
As such We recompense the gooddoers.
He was among Our believing worshipers.
Lot, too, was among the Messengers.
We saved him and all his kinsmen,
except an old woman who lingered,
and We destroyed the others.
You pass by them in the morning
and at night, will you not understand?
Jonah, too, was one of the Messengers.
He ran away to the laden ship,
and cast lots, and he was among the losers (of the lots that were cast).
So the whale swallowed him, for he was blameworthy,
and had he not been among those who exalt (Allah),
he would have lingered in its belly till the Day they are resurrected.
But We cast him, upon the shore, and he was ill,
and We caused a pumpkin tree to grow over him.
Then We sent him to a hundred thousand or more,
and they believed, and We gave them enjoyment for awhile.
Now, ask them, has your Lord daughters, and they sons?
Or, did We create the angels females while they were witnessing?
Then is it of their lying that they say:
'Allah has begotten' They are truly liars.
Has He chosen daughters above sons?
What is the matter with you? How do you judge?
What, will you not remember?
Or, do you have a clear authority?
Bring your Book, if what you say is true!
They assert kinship between Him and the angels. But the angels know that they (the liars) will be arraigned (in Hell).
Exaltations to Allah above what they describe,
except for the sincere worshipers of Allah.
But as for you, and that you worship,
you shall tempt none against Him
except for he who shall roast in Hell.
(Gabriel said to the Prophet): 'Each of us has a known place.
We are surely those who are arranged in ranks.
And we are they who exalt (Allah)'
What, would they then say:
'If only we had a reminder from the ancients,
we would have been sincere worshipers of Allah'
But they disbelieve in it (the Koran), but soon they shall know!
Our Word had already preceded Our worshipers, the Messengers,
that they shall receive Our help
and Our armies shall be the victors.
So turn (away) from them for a while.
See them and soon they shall see.
What, do they seek to hasten Our punishment?
When it descends upon their courtyards, evil will be the morning of those forewarned.
So turn (away) from them for a while,
and see, soon they shall see!
Exaltations be to your Lord, the Lord of Might, above that they describe!
Peace be on the Messengers.
And praise belongs to Allah, Lord of the Worlds.
