Saad, by the Holy Reading (Koran) of the Remembrance.
No, the unbelievers exalt in their division.
How many generations have We destroyed before them. They called: 'The time is neither of escape, nor safety'
They marvel now that, from among themselves, a warner has come to them. The unbelievers say: 'This is a lying sorcerer.
What, has he made the gods One God? This is indeed a wondrous thing'
Their assembly left (saying): 'Go, and be patient to your gods, this is something to be desired.
We never heard of this in the former religion. It is nothing but an invention.
What, out of all of us, has the Remembrance been sent down to him (Prophet Muhammad)' No, they are doubtful about My Remembrance, no, they have not yet tasted My punishment.
Or, have they the treasuries of the Mercy of your Lord, the Almighty, the Giving?
Or, is theirs the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them? Then let them ascend by (their) means!
The army is defeated as (were) the confederates.
Before them the nations of Noah, Aad and Pharaoh, and he of the tentpegs belied,
Thamood, the nation of Lot and the dwellers of the Thicket such were the confederates.
There was not one of those that did not belie the Messengers. Therefore, My retribution was realized.
These only wait for a single Shout for which there will be no delay.
They say: 'Our Lord, hasten to us our share before the Day of Recompense'
Bear patiently with what they say, and remember Our worshiper David, a man of might. He was ever turning in repentance.
We subjected the mountains to exalt (Me) with him in the evening and at sunrise,
and the birds, too, gathered each obedient to him.
We made his kingdom strong and gave him wisdom and decisive speech.
Has the news of the dispute reached you (Prophet Muhammad)? When they scaled the Sanctuary
they went to David whereupon he was afraid of them, but they said: 'Do not be afraid, we are two that have a dispute, one of us has wronged the other. Judge between us justly, and do not transgress, and guide us to the Right Path.
This, my brother has ninetynine ewes, but I have only one ewe (a female sheep). He said: "Give her into my keeping" and overcame me in the argument'
He (David) replied: 'He has without doubt wronged you in seeking to add your ewe to his sheep. Many intermixers wrong one another; except those who believe, and do good works, and they are few indeed' David realized that We had tried him and sought the forgiveness of his Lord and fell down, prostrate and repented.
So, We forgave him that, and he has a near place with Us and a fine return.
(We said): 'David, We have made you a caliph in the earth. Judge with justice among people and do not yield to your own preference in case it should lead you from the Path of Allah. Surely, a terrible punishment awaits those who stray from the Path of Allah, because they forget the Day of Reckoning'
It was not in falsehood that We created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them. That is the thought of the unbelievers. But woe to the unbelievers because of the Fire!
Are We to make those who believe and do good works the same as those who corrupt the earth? Are We to make the righteous as the wicked?
It is a Blessed Book that We have sent down to you (Prophet Muhammad), so that those possessed with minds might ponder its verses and remember.
We gave Solomon to David; and he was an excellent worshiper, he was penitent.
When his dressage steeds were presented to him in the evening,
he said: 'Indeed I have loved the love of good things better than the remembrance of my Lord until the sun has vanished behind a veil.
Bring them back to me' And he hacked their legs and necks (slaughtering them for Allah).
Indeed, We tried Solomon and placed a body (of a child) upon his throne, then he repented.
He said: 'Forgive me my Lord, and give me a kingdom the like of which will not befall any after me, surely, You are the Giver'
So We subjected the wind to him, so that it ran softly by his command wherever he wished;
and the satans, every builder and diver
and others joined together by (iron) fetters.
'This is Our gift, give or withhold without reckoning'
And he has a place near to Us, and a fine return.
Also, remember Our worshiper Job. He called out to his Lord, (saying): 'satan has afflicted me with harm and pain'
(We said): 'Stamp your foot on the ground, here is cool water with which to wash and a drink'
We restored to him to his family and like those with them, a mercy from Us and a reminder to a nation that understand.
(We said to him): 'Take a bundle of rushes and strike with it; and do not break your oath' We found him to be patient, a good worshiper and he was penitent.
Also, remember Our worshipers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, those of might and vision.
Indeed, We purified them with a most pure quality, the remembrance of the Everlasting Life.
Indeed with Us they are among the chosen, the excellent.
Also, remember our worshipers Ishmael, Elisha, and ThulKifl, they are among the good.
This is a Reminder, and indeed for the cautious is a fine return,
the Gardens of Eden whose gates shall be open to them,
in which they will recline, and call for abundant fruit and drink therein.
And with them will be maidens of equal age with modest gaze.
'This is what you are promised on the Day of Recompense,
this is Our unending provision'
All of this; but, for the proud there is an ill return.
They shall roast in (the Fire) of Gehenna, an evil cradling.
All of this; so let them taste it, boiling water and pus,
and other similar to it, joined together.
(We shall say to their leaders): 'This is a troop rushing in with you, there is no welcome for them, they shall roast in the Fire'
But they will say: 'No, it is you that has no welcome. It was you who brought it upon us, an evil place'
They will say: 'Our Lord, give those who brought this upon us double the punishment of the Fire'
And they will say: 'Why do we not see the men that we counted as being among the wicked in here?
Have we taken them in mockery? Or, have our eyes swerved from them?'
Surely that is true the disputing of the inhabitants of the Fire
Say: 'I am only a warner. There is no god except Allah, the One, the Conqueror,
the Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them; the Almighty, the Forgiving'
Say: 'This is a mighty message
from which you turn away.
I had no knowledge of the High Assembly's dispute.
This alone is revealed to me, I am only a clear warner'
When your Lord said to the angels: 'I am creating a human from clay,
after I have shaped him and breathed of My spirit (I created) into him, fall down prostrate before him'
So all the angels prostrated themselves
except iblis (satan, the father of the jinn), he became too proud, for he was one of the unbelievers.
He (Allah) said: 'iblis, what prevented you from prostrating yourself towards that which I have created with My Hands? Have you become too proud, or areyou among the grand'
He (satan) replied: 'I am better than he. You created me from fire, and You created him from clay'
'Begone' said He, 'you are stoned'.
'My curse shall rest on you until the Day of Recompense'
He (satan) replied: 'Respite me my Lord till the Day of Resurrection'
He (Allah) said: 'You are among those that are respited
till the Day of the known time'
He (satan) said: 'I swear by Your Might, that I will seduce all of them
except those among them who are Your sincere worshipers'
He (Allah) said: 'This is the truth, and I speak the truth:
I shall certainly fill Gehenna with you and every one of them that follows you'
Say (Prophet Muhammad): 'For this I ask of you no wage, and I am not of those who take things upon themselves.
This is nothing else but a reminder to all the worlds,
and after a while you shall know its news'
