HaMeem.
By the Clear Book
We have made it an Arabic Koran in order that you understand.
It is in the Origin of the Book with Us, sublime and wise.
Shall We turn away the Remembrance from you because you are a sinful nation?
How many a Prophet did We send to the ancients,
no Prophet came to them except that they mocked him,
so We destroyed those who were mightier in courage than they. And the example of the ancients has passed away.
Yet, if you ask them who created the heavens and the earth, they will answer: 'The Almighty, the Knower created them'
(It is) He who made the earth to be a cradle for you and made in it ways for you, in order that you are guided.
And (it is He), who sends down water from the sky in its measure thereby We revive the land that was dead, as such you shall be brought forth.
And, (it is He) who has created all the pairs and appointed for you ships and the cattle on which you ride,
so that you can sit upon their backs and then remember the Favors of your Lord and say: 'Exaltations to Him who has subjected these to us otherwise, we ourselves were not capable of it,
indeed, to our Lord we are turning'
Yet they assign to Him some of His own (created) worshipers! Clearly, the human is unthankful.
Or, has He taken daughters from those He has created for Himself and favored sons for you?
Yet when one of them is given glad news of (a daughter) that which he likened to the Merciful his face darkens and he chokes inwardly (with gloom).
(As such they attribute to Allah) who is brought up among ornaments but when disputes arise are powerless.
They claim that the angels, who are themselves the worshipers of the Merciful, are females. Did they witness their creation! Their witness shall be written down and they shall be questioned.
They say: 'Had it been the will of the Merciful, we would never have worshipped them' Of this they have no knowledge, they are but guessing.
Or have We given them a Book before this which they hold fast to?
No, but they say: 'We found our fathers following a creed, and by following in their footsteps we are guided.
As such, We never sent a warner before you to a village, except those living in luxury said: 'We found our fathers following a creed, and by following in their footsteps we are guided'
Say: 'What then if I bring you a better guidance than that you found your fathers following' But they reply: 'We disbelieve in that you have been sent with.'
So We took vengeance upon them, and see how the end was of those who lied.
(Remember) when Abraham, said to his father and his nation: 'I am quit from what you worship,
except Him who originated me, for He will guide me'
He made this an abiding word among his descendants, in order that they would return.
I gave them and their fathers days of enjoyment until the truth and a clear Messenger came to them.
But when the truth came to them, they said: 'This is sorcery, we disbelieve in it'
They also said: 'Why was this Koran not sent down to a great man from the two Villages'
What, is it they who divide the Mercy of your Lord! (It is) We who divided between them their livelihoods in this life, raising some in rank above others, sothat some may take the other into his service. Your Lord's Mercy is better than all they gather.
If it were not that mankind would be one nation We would have made for whosoever disbelieves in the Merciful silver roofs upon their houses, and stairs toclimb,
with doors to their houses and couches on which to recline;
and gold, surely, all this is but the enjoyment of this present life. The Everlasting Life with your Lord is for those who fear (Him).
To whosoever blinds himself from the Remembrance of the Merciful, We shall assign him a satan so he is his companion,
and they bar them from the Way, though they themselves think that they are guided.
And when he comes before Us, he shall say: 'Would that there had been between me and you, the distance of the two Easts' Evil is the companion.
Because of the harm you did, it would be of no benefit to you today, you are partners in the punishment.
What, will you make the deaf hear, or guide the blind and he who is in clear error?
Even if We take you away, We shall take vengeance upon them,
or We show you a part of that which We have promised them, for indeed We have power over them.
Therefore, hold fast to that which is revealed to you, indeed, you are on the Straight Path.
It is indeed a Reminder to you and to your nation, and without doubt you shall be questioned.
Ask Our Messengers whom We sent before you if We have ever made gods, other than the Merciful, to be worshipped.
We sent Moses with Our signs to Pharaoh and his Council, and he said: 'I am the Messenger of the Lord of the Worlds'
But when he showed them Our signs they laughed at them,
yet there was not a sign that We showed them that was not greater than its sister, and We seized them with the punishment so that they might return.
'Sorcerer' they said, 'pray to your Lord for us in accordance to the covenant He has made with you, and surely we shall be rightly guided'
But when We had relieved them of their punishment they broke their promise.
Then Pharaoh made a proclamation to his people: 'My people, is the kingdom of Egypt not mine and these rivers which flow beneath me? What, can you not see?
Am I not better than this contemptible (man), who can scarcely make things clear (because of the impediment of his speech)?
Why have no armlets of gold been given him, or angels sent down successively with him'
He (Pharaoh) intimidated his nation, so they obeyed him, for they were a sinning nation.
And when they angered Us, We took vengeance on them and drowned all of them,
and We made them a thing of the past, and We made them an example to later people.
When the son of Mary is mentioned as an example, your people turn away from it
and say: 'What are our gods better, or is he' They do not mention him to you except to dispute, truly, they are a contentious nation.
He (Prophet Jesus) was only a worshiper whom We favored and We made him an example to the Children of Israel.
Had it been Our Will We would have made angels among you as successors in the earth.
It is the knowledge of the Hour. Have no doubt concerning it, and follow me. This is a Straight Path,
and do let satan prevent you, for he is your clear enemy.
And when (Prophet) Jesus came with clear signs, he said: 'I have come to you with wisdom and to clarify to you some of the matters about which you differ. Fear Allah and obey me.
Indeed, Allah is my Lord and your Lord, therefore worship Him. That is the Straight Path'
Yet the parties differed among themselves. So woe to those who did evil among the punishment of a Painful Day.
Are they looking for anything except the Hour (to overtake them). It will come upon them suddenly when they are unaware!
On that Day close friends shall become enemies of each other, except those who fear (Allah).
O My worshipers, there is no fear for you on this Day, nor will you grieve
to those who believed in Our verses and were Muslims,
(it will be said) 'You and your spouses, enter, walking with joy into Paradise'
To them will be passed large platters and cups of gold. There will be all that souls desire and all that eyes delight in. (And it will be said:) 'There you shall live for ever.
Such is the Paradise you shall inherit, for the things you did.
You shall have therein abundant fruit to eat'
But the evildoers shall live for ever in the punishment of Gehenna (Hell),
which will not be lightened for them, and therein they shall be silent.
We did not wrong them, but they were harmdoers.
'O Malik' (the angel of Hell) they will call out, 'let your Lord put an end to us' But he will answer: 'Here you shall stay'
We brought you the truth, but most of you were averse to the truth.
Or have they devised a matter! We are devising.
Do they think We do not hear their secret and that which they conspire! Yes, indeed Our angels, who are present with them write it down.
Say (Prophet Muhammad): 'If the Merciful had a son, I would be the first of the worshipers.
Exaltations be to the Lord of the heavens and the earth, the Lord of the Throne, above that which they describe'
Let them alone to plunge and play, until they encounter that Day of theirs which they are promised.
He who is God in the heavens is also God in the earth; He is the Wise, the Knower.
Exaltations to Him to whom belong the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and all that is between them! With Him is the knowledge of the Hour and toHim you shall be returned.
Those whom they call upon, other than Him, have no power to intercede (for them), except those that have knowingly borne witness to the truth.
Yet if you ask them: 'Who created you' they will say: 'Allah' How then can they turn away from Him?
And for his saying: 'My Lord, these are an unbelieving nation'
pardon them, and say: 'Peace', soon they will know.
