HaMeem
By the Clear Book
that We sent down during a Blessed Night. We are ever warning.
In it every wise matter is determined
an order from Us. We are ever sending.
A Mercy from your Lord, He is the Hearer, the Knower.
Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, if you are certain (of your faith).
There is no god except He. He revives and causes to die. (He is) your Lord and the Lord of your fathers, the ancients.
Yet they are in doubt, playing.
Watch for the Day when the heaven will bring clear smoke,
engulfing the people; this will be a painful punishment.
'Our Lord, remove this punishment from us, we are believers'
But how will they avail themselves of the Reminder, when a clear Messenger had already come to them
but then they turned away from him, saying: 'He is tutored, mad'
We are removing the punishment a little, but you revert.
But on that Day We will assault them most mightily, and then We shall revenge!
We tried Pharaoh's nation before them. A noble Messenger came to them,
(saying:) 'Be obedient to me O worshipers of Allah. I am your honest Messenger.
Do not rise up against Allah, I come to you with clear authority.
I take refuge with my Lord and your Lord lest you stone me.
And if you do not believe me, then leave me'
Then he supplicated to his Lord saying: 'These are sinful people'
(His Lord answered): 'Set out with My worshipers in the night, for you will surely be followed.
Then leave the sea calm they are an army that will be drowned.
How many gardens and fountains did they leave behind,
and sown fields, fine sitting places,
and good things in which they took delight.
As such (it was). And We made other people inherit them.
Neither heaven nor earth shed tears for them; nor were they respited,
and We saved the Children of Israel from a humiliating punishment
from Pharaoh, who ranked high in sin,
and We chose them, out of a knowledge above the nations (of their time).
And gave signs to them in which there was a clear trial.
Yet these say:
'There is nothing except the first death, we shall never be revived.
Bring us our fathers, if what you say is true'
Are they better or the people of Tubba' and those who were before them whom We destroyed? Indeed they were sinners.
It was not in play that We created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them.
We created them in nothing else except the truth. But most do not know.
The Day of Decision is the appointed time for all.
On that Day no cousin shall help his cousin and they shall not be helped
except those on whom Allah will have mercy. He is the Almighty, the Most Merciful.
The food of the Zakkum tree
shall be the food of the guilty sinners.
Like molten copper boiling in the belly
as the boiling of the hot water.
'Seize him and drag him into the center of Hell.
Then pour the punishment of boiling water over his head,
(Saying): 'Taste, surely you are the mighty and noble!
This is that which you doubted'
Indeed, for those who feared (Allah) is a secure place
amidst gardens and fountains,
dressed in silks and brocade, set face to face.
As such, We shall wed them to wideeyed houris (the virgins of Paradise).
There in security, they will call for every kind of fruit.
There they shall not taste death, except the first death, and He will shield them from the punishment of Hell,
as a bounty from your Lord. That will be the mighty triumph.
We have now made it easy on your tongue, in order that they remember.
So be watchful, they too are watching.
