HaMeem.
The sending down of the Book is from Allah, the Almighty, the Wise.
It was in truth that We created the heavens and the earth, and all that is between them, for an appointed term. Yet the unbelievers do not turn away from that which they were warned.
Say: 'Have you seen those whom you call upon, other than Allah? Show me what they have created from the earth! Or, do they have a partnership in theheavens? Bring me a Book before this or some other remnant of knowledge, if what you say is true'
Who is further astray than he who calls upon, other than Allah, those who will never answer him till the Day of Resurrection, who are indeed, heedless of their supplication?
And, when mankind are gathered, those will become their enemies and disown their worship.
When Our clear verses are recited to them, the unbelievers say of the truth that came to them: 'This is clear sorcery'
Or, do they say: 'He has forged it' Say: 'If I have forged it, then you have no power to help me against Allah, He knows what you say. It is sufficient that Heis the Witness between me and you. He is the Forgiving, the Most Merciful'
Say: 'I am not an innovation among the Messengers; nor know what will be done with me or you. I follow only what is revealed to me; I am only a clearwarner'
Say: 'Consider, if this (Koran) is from Allah and you disbelieve in it, and a witness from the Children of Israel testifies to its like and believes, while you areproud! Indeed, Allah does not guide the harmdoers'
The unbelievers say of the believers: 'Had it been any good they would not have believed in it before us' And because they are not guided by it they say: 'This is an ancient falsehood'
Yet before it there was the Book of Moses which was an authority, and a mercy. This (Koran) is the Book confirming it (the other untampered Books) in theArabic tongue, to warn the harmdoers and to give glad tidings to those who do good.
Those who say: 'Our Lord is Allah' and follow the Straight Path shall have nothing to fear nor shall they sorrow.
Those, they shall be for ever the inhabitants of Paradise, a recompense for what they did.
We have charged the human to be kind to his parents. With much pain his mother bore him, and with much pain she gave birth to him; his bearing andweaning are thirty months. When he grows to manhood and attains his fortieth year, he says: 'Make me so disposed My Lord, so that I give thanks for the favorswith which You have blessed me, my father and mother, and that I will do good deeds that will please You. And, make me righteous and also my descendants. To You I repent, and I am among those who surrender'
Such are those from whom We will accept the best of what they have done and whose evil deeds We shall overlook. Those, they are among the inhabitants of Paradise; true is the promise that has been promised them.
But he who says to his father and his mother, 'Fie on you! Do you promise me that I shall be brought forth, when entire generations have passed away before me' Yet they supplicate to Allah for help 'Woe to you! Believe, surely the promise of Allah is true' Then he says: 'This is nothing but fairytales of the ancients'
Such are they against whom the statement is realized concerning the nations of humans and jinn alike that passed away before them; they were the losers.
Each shall have their degrees, according to what they have done, so that He will recompense them for their works, and they shall not be wronged.
Upon the Day when the unbelievers are brought before the Fire, (We shall say to them): 'You squandered your good things in your earthly life and took your fill of enjoyment in them, therefore today you shall be recompensed with a humiliating punishment, because you were unrightfully proud in the earth and for that you were debauchers'
Remember Aad's brother who warned his nation in (the valley of) Al Ahqaf. Warners had already preceded and succeeded him saying: 'Worship noneexcept Allah! (he said) 'Indeed, I fear for you the punishment of a Dreadful Day'
'Have you come to turn us away from our gods (they replied)? If what you say is true then bring down that which you promise us'
'Allah alone has the knowledge' he said, 'I am sent to deliver to you the Message. But I can see that you are ignorant people'
And when they saw it as a sudden cloud heading for their valley they said: 'This is a cloud that will bring us rain' 'Rather' (he replied): 'it is that which you have sought to hasten, a wind in which there is a painful punishment.
It will destroy everything by the command of its Lord' And when morning came there was nothing to be seen except their dwellings. As such Werecompense sinful people.
And We had established them in that which We have not established you, and We made for them hearing, sight, and hearts, but their hearing, sight, andhearts did not help them a thing, because they disbelieved the signs of Allah. And what they mocked encompassed them.
We destroyed the villages around you and We repeated Our signs so that they might return.
Why did not those who they took, other than Allah, as mediating gods help them! Indeed, they went astray from them! Such were their lies and what they were forging.
(Remember) how We sent to you (Prophet Muhammad) a company of jinn who, when they came and listened to the Koran, said to each other: 'Be silent' Then, when it was finished, they returned to their nation and warned them.
'Our nation' they said: 'we have just been listening to a Book sent down after Moses confirming what came before it and guiding to the truth and to aStraight Path.
Our nation, answer the Caller of Allah and believe in Him! He (Allah) will forgive you some of your sins and protect you from a painful punishment.
Those who do not answer the Caller of Allah cannot frustrate Allah in the earth, nor shall any one protect them other than Him; those are in clear error'
Have they not seen that it is Allah who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation, and that He is Able to restore the dead tolife? Yes, He has power over all things!
On the Day when the unbelievers are brought before the Fire they shall be asked: 'Is this not the truth' 'Yes, by our Lord' they will answer. He will say:'Then taste the punishment, for you were unbelievers'
Be patient, as the Messengers of might were patient, and do not hasten it for them. On the Day when they see what they have been promised, it will be as if they did not stay except an hour of a day. (This Koran is) a Conveyance! Shall any be destroyed except the nation of evildoers?
