Those who disbelieve and bar from the way of Allah, Allah will cause their deeds go astray.
As for the believers who do good works and believe in what is sent down to Muhammad which is the truth from their Lord He will acquit them of their sinsand repair their condition.
This is because the unbelievers follow falsehood while the believers follow the truth from their Lord. As such Allah sets forth for people their examples.
Therefore, when you meet the unbelievers smite their necks, then, when you have killed many of them, tie the bonds. Then, either free them by grace orransom until war shall lay down its loads, in this way, it shall be. Had Allah willed, He would have been victorious over them; except that He might test you, the oneby the means of others. As for those who are killed in the Way of Allah, He will not let their works to go astray.
He will guide them and repair their condition;
and He will admit them to the Paradise He has made known to them.
Believers, if you help Allah, He will help you and strengthen your feet.
But the unbelievers shall be the destroyed losers. He will bring their deeds to nothing.
That is because they hated what Allah has sent down, so He annulled their deeds.
Have they never journeyed through the land and seen what was the end of those who had gone before them? Allah destroyed them! Likewise it is for theunbelievers,
that is because Allah is the Guardian of the believers, and the unbelievers have no guardian.
Allah will indeed admit those who believe and do good works into Gardens underneath which rivers flow. As for the unbelievers, they take their fill of pleasure and eat as the cattle eat, but the Fire shall be their lodging!
How many a village mightier than your own village, which has expelled you, We have destroyed there was none to help them!
Is he who has clear proof from his Lord to be compared to him whose evil deeds are made to seem fair to him, so that they followed their desires?
The example of the Paradise which the cautious have been promised in it, there are rivers of unstaling water, and rivers of milk that never change in flavor, and rivers of wine, delectable to the drinkers, and rivers of pure, filtered honey. They shall have therein of every fruit and forgiveness from their Lord. Are they then like he who shall live in the Fire for ever and given boiling water to drink that tears his bowels apart!
Some of them listen to you, but no sooner do they leave you they ask those to whom knowledge has been given: 'What did he say just now' Such are those whom Allah has set a seal upon their hearts and who follow their own desires.
As for those who were guided, He increases their guidance and gives them their protection.
Are they looking except for the Hour to overtake them suddenly? Its signs have come. But how will they be reminded when it has come to them?
Therefore, know that there is no god except Allah and ask for forgiveness of your sins and for the believers, men and women. Allah knows your going to and fro, and your lodging.
The believers ask: 'Has a chapter been sent down' But when a clear chapter is sent down and fighting is mentioned in it, you see those in whose hearts is sickness looking towards you as one who swoons at death.
Yet obedience and honorable words (would be better for them). Then, when the matter is decided, if they were true to Allah it would be better for them.
Could it be, that if you turn away, you might make corruption in the land and break the ties of kinship?
Such are those whom Allah has cursed, making them deaf and blinding their eyes.
Will they not then contemplate on the Koran? Or are there locks upon their hearts!
As for those who turn back in their footsteps after the guidance of Allah has become clear to them, it was satan who tempted them, and Allah has respited them.
That is because they say to those averse to what Allah has sent down 'We shall obey you in some of the matters' Allah knows their secrets.
How shall it be when the angels (of death) take them and beat them on their face and back?
That is because they follow what angers Allah and hate His pleasure, therefore He has annulled their deeds.
Or, do those who have a disease in their hearts think that Allah will not reveal their hatred?
If We willed, We would show them to you and you would recognize them by their marks. But you will surely know them by their twisted speech. Allahknows your deeds.
Without doubt We shall test you until We know those who struggle and are patient among you, and make clear your news.
Those who disbelieve and bar from the Path of Allah, and break with the Messenger after guidance has been made clear to them shall not hurt Allah a thing, and He will annul their deeds.
Believers, obey Allah and His Messenger and never let your labors go in vain!
As for those who disbelieve and bar (others) from the Path of Allah and then die as unbelievers? Allah will not forgive them.
Therefore, do not be weakened and call out for peace, you shall be the upper ones, and Allah is with you and will not deprive you of your labors.
The life of this world is but play and an amusement. If you believe and are cautious, He will give you your wage, and will not ask for your possessions.
If He asked you for them, and presses you, you would be mean and He would expose your anger.
There you are! You are called upon to spend in the Way of Allah. Some of you are mean; yet whoever is mean is mean only to his own soul. Allah is theRich and you are the poor. If you turn away, He will replace you with another nation, and they will not be like you.
