Believers do not advance before Allah and His Messenger. Fear Allah. Allah is the Hearer, the Knower.
Believers, do not raise your voices above the voice of the Prophet, nor speak loudly to him as you do to one another lest your works should be annulledwithout your knowledge.
Those who lower their voice in the presence of the Messenger of Allah are those whose hearts Allah has tested for warding off (evil). They shall receiveforgiveness and a great wage.
Whereas those who call out to you from behind the apartments, most of them lack understanding.
If they had patience until you went out to them, it would have been better for them. But Allah is the Forgiving and the Most Merciful.
Believers, if an evildoer brings you a piece of news, inquire first, in case you should unwittingly wrong others and then repent of what you have done.
Know that the Messenger of Allah is among you. If he were to obey you in many matters, you would surely suffer. But Allah has endeared the Belief to youand beautified it in your hearts, and has made detestable to you disbelief, wrongdoing, and disobedience. Such are those who are righteous
by the Favor and Blessing of Allah. Allah is the Knower and the Wise.
If two parties of believers fight, reform between them. If either of them is insolent against the other, fight the insolent one till they revert to the order of Allah. If they revert, reform between them with justice, and weigh with justice. Allah loves those who weigh with justice.
Believers are indeed brothers, therefore make things right among your two brothers and fear Allah, so that you will be subject to mercy.
Believers, do not let people mock other people who may be better than themselves. Do not let women mock women, who may be better than themselves. Do not find fault with one another, nor abuse one another with nicknames. An evil name is disobedience after belief. Those who do not repent are the harmdoers.
Believers, abstain from most suspicion, some suspicion is a sin. Neither spy nor backbite one another would any of you like to eat the flesh of his deadbrother? Surely, you would loathe it. Fear Allah, without doubt Allah turns (in mercy) and He is the Merciful.
People, We have created you from a male and a female, and made you into nations and tribes that you might know one another. The noblest of you before Allah is the most righteous of you. Allah is the Knower, the Aware.
The Arabs declare: 'We believe' Say: 'You do not', rather, say: 'we submit' because belief has not yet found its way into your hearts. If you obey Allah and His Messenger, He will not reduce a thing from of your deeds. Allah is the Forgiving and the Most Merciful.
The believers are those who believe in Allah and His Messenger and have not doubted, and who struggled in His Way with their possessions and themselves. Such are those who are truthful.
Say: 'Would you teach Allah what your religion is, when Allah knows all that is in the heavens and the earth' Allah has knowledge of all things.
They regard it as a favor to you that they have submitted! Say: 'Do not regard your submission as a favor to me, rather, it is Allah who bestows upon you a favor by guiding you to belief, if you are truthful'
Indeed, Allah knows the Unseen of the heavens and the earth, and Allah is the Seer of what you do'
