Qaaf. By the Glorious Koran!
No, but they marvel that from among themselves a warner has come to them. The unbelievers say (in mockery): 'This is a marvelous thing!
What, when we are dead and turned to dust? That indeed would be an unlikely return'
We know all that the earth takes away of them, and a Book of Records is with Us.
Rather, they belied the truth when it came to them, and now they are in a state of confusion.
What, have they never observed the heaven above them, (and seen) how We built and adorned it, leaving no crack?
We spread out the earth and set upon it firm mountains, and We cause every delightful thing to grow in it
as a lesson and a reminder to every penitent worshiper.
We sent down blessed water from the sky with which We caused gardens and the grains of harvest to grow,
and tall palmtrees with compact spathes
as a provision for the worshipers; thereby We revived a land that was dead. Such shall be the emerging.
Before them, the nation of Noah, the nation of ArRass belied and so did Thamood
and Aad, Pharaoh and the brothers of Lot,
the dwellers of the Thicket and the nation of Tubba', all belied their Messengers, therefore My threat was realized.
What, were We wearied by the first creation? No, indeed; yet they are in doubt about a new creation.
Indeed, We created the human. We know the whisperings of his soul, and are closer to him than the jugular vein.
When both receivers (the angels) receive, one on his right, the other on his left,
whatever phrase he utters, an observer is present.
And when the agony of death comes in truth (they will say): 'This is what you have been trying to avoid'
And the Horn shall be blown; that is the Day of Threat!
Each soul shall come with a driver, and a witness.
(It will be said): 'Of this you have been heedless. Therefore, we have now removed your covering. Today your sight is sharp'
And his companion will say: 'This is that which I have present'
(It will be said): 'Indeed, cast into Gehenna (Hell) every deviating unbeliever,
forbidder of good, transgressor and doubter,
who has set up with Allah another god. Indeed, you two, cast him into the terrible punishment'
And his companion shall say: 'Our Lord, I did not make him insolent, he was far astray'
He (Allah) will say: 'Do not dispute before Me. I sent you a warning beforehand.
The Word cannot be changed with Me; I do not wrong My worshipers'
On that Day We shall ask Gehenna: 'Are you full' And it will answer: 'Are there any more'
And Paradise, which is not far away, shall be brought closer to those who were cautious.
(It shall be said to them): 'This is that you were promised. It is for every heeding penitent.
Whosoever fears the Merciful in the Unseen, and comes with a contrite heart.
Enter it in peace. This is the Day of Eternity'
There they have all that they desire, and with Us is much more.
How many generations, stronger in might than they have We destroyed before them! They searched the land, could they find any asylum?
Surely, in this there is a Reminder for he who has a heart or listens attentively while witnessing.
In six days We created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them and no weariness touched Us!
Bear then with patience what they say. Exalt with the praise of your Lord before sunrise and before sunset.
And exalt Him in the night, and at the ends of the prostrations.
Listen for the Day when the Caller will call from a nearby place.
On the Day when they will hear the Shout, in truth that Day they will emerge.
It is We who give life and make to die. To Us is the arrival.
Upon that Day the earth will be rent asunder from around them as they hurry forth that is an easy gathering for Us.
Indeed, We know what they say. You (Prophet Muhammad) are not a tyrant over them. Therefore, remind by the Koran whosoever fears (My) threat.
