By the scatterers (the wind) scattering,
then the bearers of weight (the clouds),
then the easy runners (the ships);
then by the distributors (angels), ordered;
indeed, that which you are promised is true,
and the recompense shall surely happen.
By the heaven with its passages,
surely, you are in different sayings,
and are turned away from him who is turned.
Woe to the liars
who are heedless in the immersion.
'When will the Day of Judgement be' they ask.
On that Day they shall be tried at the Fire,
'Taste your trial. This is what you have sought to hasten'
The righteous shall live among gardens and fountains,
receiving what their Lord will give them because before this they were gooddoers.
They slept but a little at night,
and at dawn would ask forgiveness,
and in their wealth was a share for whosoever asked and for whosoever was prevented.
For those with sure belief there are signs in the earth,
and also in yourselves. Can you not see?
In the sky is your provision and that which you are promised.
So by the Lord of heaven and earth, it is as true as your speech.
Have you heard the story of Abraham's honored guests?
They entered to him and said: 'Peace' And he replied: 'Peace, you are people unknown to me'
So he turned to his household and brought a fattened calf.
He set it before them, saying: 'Will you not eat'
Then he conceived a fear about them, and they said: 'Have no fear', and gave him the glad tidings that he was to have a knowledgeable son.
(Sarah) his wife came with an exclamation and clasped her face, and said: 'Surely, I am a barren old woman'
'Such, says your Lord' they replied: 'He is the Wise, the Knower'
'Messengers' said he (Abraham), 'what is your errand'
They replied: 'We are sent to a sinful nation,
so that we bring down stones of clay upon them
marked by your Lord for the sinful'
So We brought the believers out of that they were in.
But We found in it only one household of those who had surrendered themselves,
and left therein a sign for those who fear the painful punishment.
In Moses, too, (there were signs). We sent him to Pharaoh with clear authority,
but he turned his back with his Assembly, saying: 'He is (either) a sorcerer or a mad man'
So We seized him and his hosts and cast them into the sea. Indeed, he was blameworthy.
And in Aad. We let loose on them a withering wind
that left nothing it came upon, except that it was ashes.
And in Thamood it was said to them: 'Take your enjoyment for awhile'
But in their pride they turn away from the commandment of their Lord and the thunderbolt struck them whilst they were looking;
they could neither stand up straight, nor were they helped.
And before them the nation of Noah, indeed they were a debauched nation.
We built the heaven with might, and We widely extended it.
and We cradled the earth. And We are the Best of Cradlers.
We created two kinds of all things, so that you will remember.
Therefore, flee to Allah. I am a clear warner to you from Him.
Do not set up with Allah another god. I am a clear warner to you from Him.
Similarly, no Messenger came to those before them but they said: 'Sorcerer, or mad'
Have they handed this down from one to another? No, rather, they are an insolent nation.
So turn away from them, you shall not be blamed,
But remind, the Reminder will benefit the believers.
I have not created mankind and jinn except to worship Me.
I do not desire provision from them, nor do I desire that they should feed Me.
Surely, Allah is the Provider, the Possessor of Power, the Mighty.
The evildoers shall have for their portion, a portion like their companions (who were destroyed before them). Therefore, they should not ask Us to hasten!
Woe then to the unbelievers for their Day which they were promised!
