By the Mount
and by the Book in lines
in an exposed parchment
by the Visited House,
and the uplifted roof
and the sea that is full
surely, the punishment of your Lord is about to come,
there is none to prevent it.
Upon the Day when the heaven spins dizzily
and the mountains move, moving.
On that Day woe to those who belied
those who are in plunging, playing.
On that Day when they shall be pitched into the Fire of Gehenna (Hell),
(it will be said to them): 'This is the Fire which you belied!
Is this magic, or is it that you do you not see?
Roast in it, bear it with or without patience, it is the same, you are only being recompensed for that which you used to do'
But in the Gardens the righteous shall live in bliss,
rejoicing in all their Lord has given them, and their Lord will guard them against the punishment of Hell.
(It will be said): 'Eat and drink with a good appetite because of that which you did'
(They shall be) reclining on couches ranged in rows and We shall wed them to houris (virgins of Paradise) with large wide eyes.
Those who believe, and whose descendants follow in belief, We will join their descendants to them. And We will not reduce them of anything of their deeds. Every one is pledged for what he has earned.
We shall give them fruits and meat as they desire.
There they will pass a goblet to one another with neither idle talk nor sin,
and youths, of their own, shall pass among them as if they were hidden pearls.
They will go to one another asking each other questions:
'When we were among our people' they will say, 'we were ever fearful,
but Allah has been gracious to us and has protected us from the punishment of the burning wind.
Before, we were supplicating to Him. He is the Giving, the Most Merciful'
Therefore, remind. By the Favor of Allah, you are neither a soothsayer, nor mad.
Or do they say: 'He is a poet, we are waiting for some misfortune to befall him'
Say: 'Wait if you will; I shall be waiting with you'
Or, do their intellects order them to do this? Or, are they an insolent people?
Do they say: 'He has invented it' No, they do not believe.
Let them produce a phrase like it, if what they say is true!
Or, were they created out of nothing? Or, were they their own creators?
Or, did they create the heavens and the earth? No, their belief is not certain!
Or, are the treasures of your Lord in their keeping? Or, are they the controllers?
Or, do they have a ladder on which they listen? Then let any of them that has listened bring a clear authority.
Or, has He daughters, and they sons?
Or, do you ask them for a wage, so that they become weighed down in debt?
Or, is the Unseen in their keeping, so they are writing it down?
Or, do they desire to outwit? The unbelievers are the outwitted.
Or, do they have a god, other than Allah? Exaltations to Allah above that which they associate!
Even if they saw lumps falling from the sky they would say: 'A massed cloud'
So leave them till they encounter their Day in which they shall be thunderstruck.
The Day when their guile shall not relieve them a thing, and they shall not be helped.
For the harmdoers there is indeed, a punishment before that, but most of them do not know.
And be patient under the Judgement of your Lord, surely, you are before Our Eyes. And exalt with the praise of your Lord when you arise,
and exalt Him in the night and at the declining of the stars.
