By the star when it plunges,
your companion is neither astray, neither errs,
nor does he speak out of desire.
Indeed it is not except a Revelation which is revealed,
taught by One who is Stern in power.
Of might, he (Gabriel) stood firm
while he was in the highest horizon;
then he drew near, and became close
he was but two bows' length or even nearer,
so (Allah) revealed to His worshiper (Gabriel) that which he revealed (to Prophet Muhammad).
His heart did not lie of what he saw.
What, will you dispute with him about what he sees!
Indeed, he saw him in another descent
at the Lote Tree (Sidrat tree) of the ending
close to the Garden of Refuge.
When there comes to the Lote Tree, that which comes
his eyes did not swerve, nor did they stray
for indeed he saw one of the greatest signs of his Lord.
(Among the idols) have you considered allat and al'uzza,
and, another, the third manat?
What, have you males, and He females!
That is indeed an unjust division.
They are but names, named by you and your fathers. Allah has not sent down any authority for them. They follow conjecture and their soul's desire, eventhough the guidance of their Lord has come to them.
Is the human to have whatever he fancies?
To Allah belongs the Eternal life and the first life.
How many an angel is there in the heavens whose intercession shall not benefit until Allah gives permission to whom He will and is pleased.
Those who disbelieve in the Everlasting Life call the angels by female names.
Yet of this they have no knowledge, they follow mere conjecture, and conjecture does not help against truth.
So turn from those who turn away from Our Remembrance and only desire this present life.
That is all they have of knowledge. Your Lord knows best who has strayed from His Path, and those who are guided.
To Allah belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth. He will recompense the evildoers according to their deeds, and recompense those who have done good with the finest reward
those who avoid the major sin and indecencies except the small sins, indeed your Lord is of immense forgiveness and He is more knowledgeable of you when He created you from the earth and when you were still unborn in your mothers' wombs. Do not praise yourself. Allah knows the cautious.
Have you considered he who turns his back,
and gives a little, grudgingly?
Or, does he possess knowledge of the Unseen, and can therefore see?
Or, has he not been told of that which is in the Scrolls of Moses
and Abraham, who paid his debt in full?
That no soul shall bear another's burden,
and that everyone shall have in his account only that which he worked for,
and that his work is surely seen
then, he shall be recompensed for it in full repayment
and that the final return is to your Lord,
that it is He who causes to laugh and causes to weep.
and that it is He who causes to die, and causes to live
and that it is He who created pairs, the male and the female,
from an ejaculated drop (of sperm),
and that upon Him is the second creation
and that it is He who gives riches and causes to hoard,
and that He is the Lord of (the star) Sirius,
that it was He that destroyed ancient Aad
and Thamood, sparing no one,
and before them the nation of Noah, they exceeded in evil and were insolent.
He plunged the villages
so that there came upon them that which came.
So which then of your Lord's favors do you dispute?
This is a warner from the warners of ancient times.
The Imminent is near at hand;
none except Allah can disclose it.
Do you marvel then at this discourse (the Koran)?
Or do you laugh, and do you not weep
while you are thoughtless?
Rather, prostrate to Allah and worship Him.
