The Hour is drawing near, and the moon is split (in two).
Yet if they see a sign (the unbelievers) turn their backs and say: 'This is but a continuation of sorcery'
They have belied, and follow their own fancies. But, every issue will be settled!
Tidings containing a deterrent have come to them
which are full of wisdom; but the warnings do not help.
Therefore, turn away from them. On the Day when the Caller summons them to a terrible thing,
their eyes will be humbled as they come out from their graves as if they were scattered locusts,
running (with their necks extended) to the Caller. The unbelievers will say: 'This is indeed a harsh Day'
(Long) before them the nation of Noah belied. They belied Our worshiper saying: 'Mad' and he was reprimanded.
Then he supplicated to his Lord, (saying): 'I am overcome, help me'
We opened the Gates of Heaven with torrential water
and caused the earth to gush with springs, so that the waters met for a predestined matter.
We carried him in a well built, watertight vessel made from planks (of wood)
that ran on under Our Eyes, a recompense for him because he had been disbelieved.
We have left it as a sign. Is there any that will remember?
How then were My punishment and My warnings!
We have made the Koran easy to remember, is there any that will remember!
Aad too belied. How then were My punishment and My warnings!
And We sent against them a howling wind in a Day of continuous of ill fortune
and snatched people up as though they were stumps of uprooted palmtrees.
How then were My punishment and My warnings!
We have made the Koran easy to remember, is there any that will remember?
Thamood, too, belied Our warnings.
They said: 'Are we to follow a mortal who is one of us? Then indeed, we would surely be in error and insane.
Out of all of us has the Reminder been given to him alone? Rather, he is indeed an arrogant liar'
(To him We said): 'Tomorrow they shall know who is the arrogant liar.
We are sending to them as a trial, a shecamel, so watch them and have patience.
Tell them that the water is to be divided between them, a drink each for them in turn'
But they called their companion who took hold of her and hamstrung her.
How then were My punishment and My warnings!
Then We sent against them one Shout and they became like the trampled twigs of the (sheep) penbuilder.
We have made the Koran an easy Remembrance, is there any that will remember!
The nation of Lot belied Our warnings.
We let loose on all of them a squall of claystones, except for the house of Lot whom We saved at dawn
through Our Mercy. So it is that We recompense the thankful.
He had warned them of Our assault but they disputed the warnings.
They even solicited of him his guests, but We obliterated their eyes: 'Now, taste My punishment and My warnings'
And at daybreak a determined punishment came upon them.
'Now, taste My punishment and My warnings'
We have made the Koran an easy Remembrance, is there any that will remember!
The warnings also came to Pharaoh's people,
but they belied all Our signs so We seized them with the seizing of the Mighty, Powerful.
What then, are your unbelievers better than those? Or do you have an immunity (written) in the Scrolls?
Or do they say: 'We are a gathering that will be victorious'
Most certainly their gatherings shall be routed, and they will turn their backs.
Rather, the Hour is their encounter. And that Hour will be most calamitous and bitter.
Indeed the wrongdoers are in error and a raging fire.
On the Day when they are dragged on their faces into the Fire, (it will be said to them): 'Taste the touch of the Scorching'
Indeed, We have created all things according to a measure.
And Our Order is but one word like the flashing of an eye.
And We destroyed those like you, is there any that will remember!
All their deeds are in the Scrolls,
everything, be it great or small, is recorded.
Indeed, the cautious shall live amid gardens and a river,
in a secure abode, in the presence of the Powerful King.
