When the Event (the resurrection) comes
there is no denying its coming
(it will) abase (some) and exalt (others).
When the earth is shaken
and the mountains fragmented
becoming scattered dust,
you shall be divided into three parties,
Companions of the Right, what are the Companions of the Right?
Companions of the Left, what are the Companions of the Left?
And the Outstrippers, the Outstrippers
those are they brought near (to their Lord)
in the Gardens of Delight,
a host of the ancients
but only a few from the later generations.
on lavish couches
they shall recline, facing each other,
(and there) shall wait on them immortal youths
with goblets and ewers, and a cup from a spring
that will neither make the head throb, nor intoxicate,
with fruits of their own choice
and any flesh of fowl that they desire.
And wideeyed houris
like hidden pearls,
a recompense for all that they did.
There they shall hear no idle talk, no cause of sin,
but only the saying: 'Peace, Peace'
The Companions of the Right
(will be) among thornless Lote trees.
Bananatrees, piled
and continuous shade,
and flowing water
and an abundance of fruits,
unfailing and not forbidden.
And couches raised up.
Indeed We formed them (the houris and all believing women),
and made them virgins,
chaste, loving companions of the same age
for the Companions of the Right
a multitude of the ancients,
and a multitude of the later people.
As for the Companions of the Left
(they shall live) amid burning winds and boiling water,
in the shadow of a smoking blaze,
neither cool nor good.
Before they lived at ease,
and persisted in the great sin
and constantly said: 'What, when we are dead and become dust and bones, shall we then be restored to life?
What, and our fathers, the ancients'
Say: 'Those of ancient times and those of later times
shall be gathered together to the appointed time on a known Day'
Then you went astray, you that belied,
you shall eat (the fruit) of the Tree of Zakkum.
You shall fill your bellies with it,
and drink boiling water on top of that,
and you will drink as the lapping of thirsty camels.
Such shall be your hospitality on the Day of Recompense.
We created you, why will you not believe!
Have you thought about what (sperm) you ejaculate?
Did you create it, or are We the Creator?
It was We who decreed death among you. We will not be surpassed
that We will change you and cause you to grow again in a way you do not know.
You have surely known of the first creation. Why then, will you not remember!
Ponder upon the soil you till,
is it you that sow it, or are We the Sower?
If We will, We would make it broken stubble and you would remain wondering,
(Saying:) 'We are laden with debts!
Rather, we have been prevented'
Have you thought about the water you drink?
Is it you that send it down from the clouds or We?
If We will, We would make it bitter, why then do you not give thanks?
Have you thought about the fire you kindle?
Is it you that originated its tree, or are We the Originator?
We have made it a reminder, and a blessing to the traveler.
Then, exalt the Name of your Lord, the Great.
I swear by the fallings of the stars
and that is a mighty oath, if you but knew
it is indeed a Glorious Koran,
in a Book protected (from tampering)
which none shall touch except the purified;
a sending down from the Lord of all the Worlds.
What, do you hold this discourse in disdain,
do you make it your provision to belie it?
Why, then, when the soul leaps up to the throat of the dying
and you are watching at that time
We are nearer to him than you, but you do not see
why then, if you are not revived,
do you not restore his soul, if you are truthful?
If he is among the near
there shall be calmness and ease, a Garden of Delight.
If he is a Companion of the Right
(he will be greeted with): 'Peace be upon you, Companion of the Right'
But, if he is of those who belied, and went astray,
there shall be a hospitality of boiling water,
and a roasting in Hell.
Indeed, this is the certain truth.
So exalt the Name of your Lord, the Great.
