Allah has heard the words of her that reasons with you (Prophet Muhammad) concerning her husband and made her complaint to Allah. Allah has heard both of you discussing with one another. Indeed, Allah is the Hearer, the Seer.
Those of you who say to their wives, 'Be as my mother's back' indeed, they are not their mothers. Their mothers are only those who gave birth to them. Indeed they speak dishonorably and falsely. But Allah is the Pardoning, the Forgiving.
Those who say to their wives, 'Be as my mother's back' then retract their words thereafter shall set a person free before they touch each other again. By that you are admonished. Allah is Aware of all that you do.
He who is unable shall fast for two successive months before they touch one another. If he is unable to do this, let him feed sixty needy people that, so that you believe in Allah and His Messenger. Such are the bounds of Allah. There is a painful punishment awaiting the unbelievers.
Those who oppose Allah and His Messenger shall be frustrated just as those before them were frustrated. We have sent down proofs and clear verses, and for the unbelievers, there is a humiliating punishment.
On the Day when Allah will raise them up all together He will inform them of what they did. Allah has taken count of it, although they have forgotten. Allah is Witness to all things.
Have you not seen that Allah knows that which is in the heavens and the earth? There is no secret talk between three but He is the fourth of them; nor between five but He is the sixth of them; nor between fewer or more but He is with them wherever they are. Then, on the Day of Resurrection, He will inform them of what they have done. Surely, Allah has knowledge of all things.
Have you not seen those who were forbidden to talk in secrecy together? They return to that which they are forbidden and talk secretly together in sin andhatred, and in disobedience to the Messenger. Then, when they come to you they greet you with greetings with which Allah does not greet you, and they say within themselves: 'Why does Allah not punish us for what we say' Gehenna (Hell) suffices them, they shall be roasted, an evil arrival!
Believers, when you talk in secret do not talk together in sin and hatred, and disobedience towards the Messenger, but talk of piety and caution. Fear Allah before whom you shall be gathered.
Talking together maliciously in secret is from satan, so that believers should sorrow, yet he can not harm them at all, except by the permission of Allah. In Allah let the believers put their trust.
Believers, make room in your sitting places when it is asked of you, and Allah will make room for you. When you are asked to move, so move, and Allahwill raise up in ranks those who believed among you and those who have been given knowledge. Allah is Aware of what you do.
Believers, when you consult with the Messenger, present before your consultation a free will offering. That is best and purest for you. But if you lack themeans, Allah is the Forgiver and the Most Merciful.
Are you afraid to offer a freewill offering before your consultation? But if you do not, Allah will turn to you again, then establish the prayer and pay theobligatory charity, and be obedient to Allah and His Messenger. Allah is Aware of what you do.
Do you see those who have been guided by a nation that incurred the Wrath of Allah? They belong neither to you, nor to them, and knowingly they swear to lies.
Allah has prepared for them a grievous punishment. Evil indeed is that which they have done.
They have taken their oaths as a disguise and bar from the Way of Allah, so a humiliating punishment awaits them.
Neither their wealth nor their children shall help them a thing against Allah. They are the inhabitants of the Fire, and there they shall live for ever.
On the Day when Allah shall raise them all up, they will swear to Him as they now swear to you thinking that they are upon something. Indeed, they are the liars!
satan has mastered them and caused them to forget the Remembrance of Allah. Those are satan's party; and satan's party shall assuredly be the losers.
Those who oppose Allah and His Messenger shall be among the humiliated.
Allah has written: 'I will surely be the Victor, I and My Messengers' Surely, Allah is the Strong, the Almighty.
You shall find no nation believing in Allah and the Last Day loving anyone that opposes Allah and His Messenger, even though they be their fathers, theirsons, their brothers, or their tribe. Those, He has written upon their hearts faith and strengthened them with a spirit from Him. He will admit them to the Gardensunderneath which rivers flow, where they shall live for ever. Allah is pleased with them and they are pleased with Him. They are the Party of Allah; and the Party ofAllah are the winners.
