All that is in heavens and earth exalt Allah. He is the Almighty, the Wise.
It was He who expelled the unbelievers among the People of the Book from their homes into the first exile. You did not think that they would go out, and they thought their fortresses would protect them from Allah. But Allah came upon them from where they did not expect, casting terror into their hearts that their homes were destroyed by their own hands as well as by the hands of the believers. Therefore, take heed you that have eyes.
Had it been that Allah had not decreed that they should be dispersed, He would have surely punished them in this world. And in the Everlasting Life thepunishment of the Fire awaits them,
because they broke their promise with Allah and His Messenger; and whosoever breaks their promise with Allah Allah is Stern in retribution.
Whatever palmtree you cut down or left standing upon its roots, it is by the permission of Allah, so that He might humiliate the impious.
And whatever spoils of war Allah has given to His Messenger from them, you hastened on neither horse nor camel against them, but Allah gives HisMessengers authority over whom He will. Allah is Powerful over all things.
The spoils of war taken from the villagers and given by Allah to His Messenger belong to Allah, His Messenger and the near kinsmen, the orphans, the needy and the destitute traveler, so that it is not something taken in turns by the rich among you. Whatever the Messenger gives you, accept it; and whatever he forbids you, abstain. And fear Allah; surely, Allah is Stern in retribution.
(A share of the spoils shall also be given) to the poor emigrants who were expelled from their homes and their possessions, who seek the Favor and Pleasure of Allah, and help Allah and His Messenger. These are they that are truthful.
And those before them who had made their dwelling in the abode (the City of Madinah), and because of their belief love those who have emigrated to them; they do not find any (envy) in their chests for what they have been given and prefer them above themselves, even though they themselves have a need. Whosoever is saved from the greed of his own soul, they are the ones who win.
Those who came after them say: 'Forgive us our Lord, and forgive our brothers who were believers before us. Do not put in our hearts any spite towards those who believe. Lord, You are the Gentle, the Most Merciful'
Have you not seen the hypocrites? They say to their brothers among the People of the Book who disbelieve, 'If they expel you, we will go with you. We willnever obey anyone against you. If they fight against you we will certainly help you' But Allah bears witness that they are, without doubt, liars.
If they are expelled or fought against, they will not go with them, nor will they will help them. Indeed, if they helped them, they would turn their backs andthen they would not be helped.
Their fear of you in their hearts is greater than their fear of Allah; that is because they are a people who do not understand.
They will never fight against you all together except from fortified villages or from behind walls. Their courage is great among themselves; you think them to be united, yet their hearts are not united. That is because they are a people who have no sense.
Just as those who, not long before, tasted the mischief of their actions, there awaits for them a painful punishment.
Like satan when he said to the human, 'Disbelieve'; then as soon as he disbelieved, he said, 'Indeed, I am innocent of you, surely, I fear Allah, the Lord of all the Worlds'
Their end shall be that they live for ever in the Fire. That is the recompense of the harmdoers.
Believers, fear Allah. Let every soul look to what it has forwarded for the future, and fear Allah, for Allah is Aware of the things you do.
Do not be like those who have forgotten Allah so that He has caused them to forget their souls. Those, they are the evildoers.
The inhabitants of the Fire and the inhabitants of Paradise are not equal. The inhabitants of Paradise shall be triumphant.
Had We sent down this Koran upon a mountain, you would have seen it humble itself and split asunder for fear of Allah. Such are the parables we strike for people so that they will reflect.
He is Allah, there is no god except He. He knows the Unseen and the Visible. He is the Merciful, the Most Merciful.
He is Allah, there is no god except He. He is the King, the Pure, the Peace, the Confirmer, the Watchful, the Almighty, the Compeller, the Sublime. Exalted is Allah, above all that they associate!
He is Allah, the Creator, the Originator, the Shaper. To Him belong the Most Beautiful Names. All that is in the heavens and earth exalt Him. He is theAlmighty, the Wise.
