All that is in the heavens and earth exalt Allah. He is the Almighty, the Wise.
Believers, why do you say what you never do?
It is most hateful to Allah that you should say that which you do not do.
Allah loves those who fight in His Way lining up as if they were a stacked building.
And when Moses, said to his nation: 'Why do you harm me, when you know that I am the Messenger of Allah sent to you' But when they swerved away Allah caused their hearts to swerve. Allah never guides impious people.
And when (Prophet) Jesus, the son of Mary said: 'Children of Israel, I am sent to you by Allah to confirm the Torah that was before me, and to give news of a Messenger (Prophet Muhammad) who will come after me whose name shall be Ahmad' Yet when he came to them with clear proofs, they said: 'This is clearsorcery'
And who does greater evil than he who forges a lie against Allah, when he is being called to Islam? Allah does not guide the harmdoing people.
They seek to extinguish the Light of Allah with their mouths; but Allah will complete His Light, much as the unbelievers dislike it.
It is He who has sent His Messenger with guidance and the Religion of Truth, so that He raises it above all religions, much as the unbelievers dislike it.
Believers! Shall I direct you to a commerce that will save you from a painful punishment?
You shall believe in Allah and His Messenger and struggle for His Way with your possessions and yourselves. That is better for you, if you but knew.
He will forgive you your sins and admit you to Gardens underneath which rivers flow, and to fine dwelling places in the Gardens of Eden. That is the mightytriumph.
And other things that you love, victory from Allah and an opening that is near. (O Prophet Muhammad) give glad tidings to the believers.
Believers, be the helpers of Allah. When (Prophet) Jesus, the son of Mary said to the disciples: 'Who will be my helpers unto Allah' The disciples replied:'We will be the helpers of Allah' A party of the Children of Israel believed, and a party disbelieved. So, We supported those who believed against their enemy, and they overcame.
