All that is in heavens and earth exalt Allah. His is the Kingdom, and His the Praise. He is powerful over all things.
It is He who created you. Amongst you is an unbeliever and amongst you is a believer. Allah sees the things you do.
He created the heavens and the earth in truth and He shaped you and gave you good shapes. To Him is the arrival.
He knows whatever is in the heavens and the earth and He knows all what you conceal and what you reveal. Allah knows the innermost of the chests.
Have you not heard the news of those before you who disbelieved? They tasted the mischief of their action, and for them is a painful punishment.
That is because, when their Messengers came to them with clear proofs they said: 'Shall humans be our guides' They disbelieved and turned away, but Allah was not in need (of them). Allah is the Rich and the Praised.
The unbelievers think that they will never be raised up. Say: 'By my Lord, yes indeed, you shall assuredly be raised up! Then you shall be told of all that you have done. That is easy for Allah'
Believe in Allah, and His Messenger, and in the Light which We have sent down. Allah is Aware of all that you do.
The Day on which He will gather you for the Day of Gathering; that is the Day of Loss and Gain. He who believes in Allah and does good deeds, Allah willacquit him of his evil deeds and admit him to Gardens underneath which rivers flow, where he shall live for ever. That is the mighty triumph.
As for those who disbelieved and belied Our verses, they shall be the inhabitants of the Fire and shall live therein for ever. Evil shall be their arrival.
No affliction falls except by the permission of Allah. For those who believe in Allah, Allah will guide his heart. Allah has knowledge of all things.
Obey Allah and obey the Messenger. But, if you turn away, Our Messenger's duty is only to deliver the Clear Message.
Allah, there is no god except He. In Allah let the believers put their trust.
Believers, some of your wives and children are enemies; so beware of them. But if you pardon, overlook and forgive them, then Allah is the Forgiving, the Most Merciful.
Your wealth and children are but a trial, and with Allah is a mighty wage.
Therefore fear Allah as much as you can, and listen, obey, and spend well for yourselves. And whosoever is saved from the greed of his own soul; those are the winners.
If you lend a good loan to Allah He will multiply it for you and will forgive you. Allah is the Thankful, the Clement.
He is the Knower of the Unseen and the Visible, the Almighty, the Wise.
