O Prophet, why do you forbid that which Allah has made lawful to you. Do you seek to please your wives' Allah is the Forgiving, the Most Merciful.
Allah has absolved you from your oaths. Allah is your Guardian, the Knowing, the Wise.
The Prophet confided a certain matter to one of his wives but thereafter she disclosed it, then Allah revealed what she had done to him. He made part of it known and another part not. And when he acquainted her with it, she said: 'Who has told you this' He replied: 'I was told of it by the Knower, the Aware'
If both of you (wives) turn to Allah in repentance, even though your hearts inclined; but if you support one another against him, (know that) Allah is hisGuardian, and Gabriel, and the righteous among the believers; and thereafter the angels are his reinforcers.
It may be that if he divorces you his Lord will give him in your place better wives than yourselves, women who have surrendered, believing, obedient, penitent worshippers and given to fasting; who were (previously) married, and virgins too.
Believers, guard yourselves and your families against the Fire the fuel of which is people and stones, over which there are harsh, and stern angels who never disobey Allah in that which He orders and do what they are ordered.
Unbelievers, make no excuse for yourselves this Day. You shall be recompensed only according to your deeds.
Believers, turn to Allah in sincere repentance. Your Lord may acquit you of your sins, and admit you to Gardens underneath which rivers flow on a Day whenAllah will not degrade the Prophet and those who believe with him. Their light will run before them and on their right hands, and they will say: 'Our Lord, completeour light for us and forgive us. Surely, You have power over all things'
O Prophet, struggle with the unbelievers and the hypocrites and deal harshly with them. Gehenna (Hell) shall be their refuge, an evil arrival!
Allah has given as an example for the unbelievers, the wife of Noah and the wife of Lot. They were married to two of Our righteous worshipers, but theybetrayed them. It was not for (Noah and Lot) to avail them a thing. It was said to them both: 'Enter the Fire with those who shall enter'
But to those who believe Allah has given as an example Pharaoh's wife, who said: 'My Lord, build me a house before You in Paradise and save me fromPharaoh and his work, and save me from a harmdoing nation'
And, Mary, 'Imran's daughter, who guarded her chastity so We breathed into her of Our Spirit (Gabriel); and she put her trust in the Words of her Lord andHis Books, and was among the devout.
