Blessed be He in whose Hand is the Kingdom, He is powerful over all things,
who created death and life that He might examine which of you is best in deeds, and He is the Almighty, the Forgiving,
who created the seven heavens, one above the other. You cannot see any inconsistency in the creation of the Merciful. Return your gaze, do you see anycrack!
Then return your gaze once more and yet again, your gaze comes back to you dazzled, and tired.
We have adorned the lower heaven with lamps, and We made them a stoning for the satans, We have prepared the punishment of the Blaze for them.
And for those who disbelieve in their Lord there awaits the punishment of Gehenna (Hell) an evil arrival!
When they are cast into it they shall hear it sighing, while it boils
nearly bursting apart out of rage. Every time a host is cast therein, its keepers will ask them: 'Did no one come to warn you'
'Yes, indeed' they will reply, 'but we belied the Warner (Messenger) saying: 'Allah has not sent down anything, you are but in great error'
And they will then say: 'If only we had listened and understood we should not now be among the inhabitants of the Blaze'
So it is that they confess their sins. Curse the inhabitants of the Blaze!
But those who fear their Lord in the Unseen, for them there is forgiveness and a great wage.
(Whether you) speak in secret or aloud, He knows the innermost of the chests.
Shall He who has created (all things) not know? He is the Subtle, the Aware.
It is He who has made the earth submissive to you. Walk about in its land and eat of His provision. To Him is the Resurrection.
Do you feel secure that He who is in the heaven will not cause the earth to swallow you up while it shakes?
Do you feel secure that He who is in the heaven will not loose against you a squall of pebbles then you shall know how was My warning.
Those who have gone before you also belied (their Messengers) then how was My disapproval!
Do they not observe the birds above them, spreading their wings and folding them? None, except the Merciful holds them. Surely, He sees all things.
Or, who is it that shall be your host to help you, other than the Merciful? Indeed, the unbelievers are only deluded.
Or, who is it that shall provide for you if He withholds His provision? Yet they persist in arrogance and aversion.
What, is he who walks, falling upon his face, more guided than he who walks upright on a Straight Path!
Say: 'It is He who has created you and given to you hearing, sight and hearts but little is it that you thank'
Say: 'It was He who created you, dispersing you in the earth, and to Him you shall be gathered'
They ask: 'When will this promise come, if you speak truthfully'
Say: 'The knowledge (of that) is with Allah; I am only a clear warner'
Then, when they see it drawing near, the faces of the unbelievers will be blackened, and it is said: 'This is what you were promised'
Say: 'What do you think, if Allah destroys me and those with me, or has mercy upon us, who then will protect the unbelievers from the painful punishment'
Say: 'He is the Merciful. In Him we believe and in Him we put all our trust. Indeed, you shall soon know who is in clear error'
Say: 'What do you think. If your water should sink into the earth in the morning, who then would bring you running water'
