The Resurrection Verifier;
and what is the Resurrection Verifier?
What makes you to know what the Resurrection Verifier is?
Thamood and Aad belied the Clatterer.
Thamood, they were destroyed by the violent shout (of Gabriel),
as for Aad, they were destroyed by a howling, violent wind
that He subjected upon them for seven nights and eight days consecutively and you might have seen them struck down as if they were the stumps of palm trees that had fallen down.
Can you see any remnant of them now?
Similarly, Pharaoh, and those before him, and the ruined villages, sinned
and rebelled against their Lord's Messenger. So He took them with a stern taking.
And when the waters rose (high) We carried you in the sailing (Ark),
making it a Reminder for you, for all attentive ears to retain.
When a single blow is blown on the Horn,
when the earth with all its mountains is lifted up and crushed with a single blow,
on that Day, the Event occurs.
The heaven will be split; because on that Day it will be frail.
The angels will stand on all its sides. And on that Day, eight (of them) will carry the Throne of your Lord above them.
On that Day you shall be exposed, and no secret of yours will remain hidden.
Then, he who is given his book in his right hand will say: 'Here, take and read my book!
Indeed, I knew that I should come to my reckoning'
His shall be a pleasing life
in a high Garden,
its fruits are near.
(It will be said): 'Eat and drink with a good appetite because of what you did in days long passed'
But, he who is given his book in his left hand will say: 'Woe to me, would that my book had not been given to me!
Nor that I knew my reckoning!
Would that it (my death) had ended it all!
My wealth has not helped me a thing
and my authority has been destroyed'
(It will be said): 'Take him and bind him.
Roast him in Hell,
then in a chain seventy arm's lengths long insert him.
He did not believe in Allah, the Great,
nor did he urge the feeding of the needy.
Today he shall have no loyal friend here,
nor any food except foul pus
that none but sinners eat'
I swear by all that you can see,
and all that you do not see,
that this is the speech of a noble Messenger.
It is not the speech of a poet little do you believe
nor is it the speech of a soothsayer little do you remember.
(It is) a sending down from the Lord of all the Worlds.
Had he invented sayings against Us,
We would have seized him by the right hand
then, We would surely have cut from him the aorta (vein)
not one of you could have prevented it from him.
Indeed, it is a Reminder to those who fear Allah,
We know that there are some among you who will belie.
Indeed, it is a sorrow to the unbelievers
yet it is a certain truth.
Exalt the Name of your Lord, the Great.
