AlifLaamMeemSaad.
The Book has been sent down to you; so let your chest have no constriction because of it, in order to warn thereby and as a reminder to the believers.
Follow that which is sent down to you from your Lord and do not follow guardians other than Him; little do you remember.
How many a village have We laid in ruin! In the night Our Might fell upon it, or at midday when they were drowsy.
And when Our Might fell upon them they only said: 'We have indeed been harmdoers'
We will question those to whom Our Message was sent, as We shall question the Messengers.
With knowledge We will narrate to them, for We are never absent.
On that Day, the weighing is true. He whose scales are heavy those are the prosperers,
but he whose scales are light those have lost their souls because they were harmful towards Our verses.
We established you in the earth and made for you a livelihood but little is it that you give thanks.
We created you then We shaped you, then We said to the angels: 'Prostrate yourselves before Adam' They all prostrated themselves except iblis he was not among the prostrated.
He (Allah) asked: 'What prevented you to prostrate, when I commanded you' 'I am better than he' he replied. 'You created me of fire and You created him of clay'
He (Allah) said: 'Descend from it! This is no place for you to be proud. Begone, you are of the humiliated'
he replied: 'Respite me till the Day of Resurrection'
Said He (Allah): 'you are among the respited'
he answered: 'Because You have caused me to go astray, I will waylay them as they walk on Your Straight Path,
and come upon them from the front and from the rear, from their right and from their left. Then, You shall find most of them ungrateful'
'Begone' said He, 'despised and outcast. (As for) those of them that follow you, I shall fill Gehenna (Hell) with all of you'
'O Adam dwell with your wife in Paradise, and eat from whatever you please; but never approach this tree or you shall both become harmdoers'
But satan whispered to them, so that he might reveal to them their shameful parts which had been hidden from them, he said: 'Your Lord has prohibited you from this tree lest you both become angels or become among the immortal'
he swore to both: 'Indeed, I am to you among the advisers'
So he cheated both by delusion. And when they had tasted the tree, their shameful parts became apparent to them, and they both covered themselves with the leaves of Paradise. (Then) their Lord called to them, saying: 'Did I not prohibit you to approach that tree, and did I not warn you that satan was your clear enemy'
Both replied: 'Lord, We have harmed ourselves. If You do not forgive us and have mercy on us, we shall surely be among the lost'
He said: 'Descend, each of you an enemy to each other. The earth will be a dwelling place for you and an enjoyment for a time.
He said: 'There you shall live and there you shall die, and from there you shall emerge'
Children of Adam! We have sent down to you clothing that covers your nakedness, and feathers. But the clothing of piety that is better. That is one of the signs of Allah, in order that they remember.
Children of Adam! Do not let satan tempt you, as he brought your parents out of Paradise. He stripped them of their garments to show them their shameful parts. Indeed he and his descendants see you from where you cannot see them. We have made the satans supporters of those who do not believe.
When they commit an indecency, they say: 'This is what we found our fathers practicing, and with it Allah has ordered us' Say: 'Allah does not order indecency. Would you tell of Allah what you do not know'
Say: 'My Lord ordered justice. Turn your faces to Him in every place of prayer and supplicate to Him, making the religion sincerely to Him. As He originated you, you shall return'
Some He has guided, and upon some justly is the straying; for they had chosen the satans for supporters instead of Allah and suppose themselves to be guided.
Children of Adam, take your adornment at every place of prayer. Eat and drink, and do not waste. He does not love the wasteful.
Say: 'Who has forbidden the adornment that Allah has brought for His worshipers and the good provision' Say: 'They are in this life for those who believe, and purely theirs on the Day of Resurrection' As such We distinguish the verses to people who know.
Say: 'My Lord has forbidden all indecent acts whether apparent or disguised and sin, and unjust insolence, and that you associate with Allah that for which He has never sent down an authority, or to say about Allah what you do not know'
To every nation a term; when their term comes they shall not delay it by a single hour, nor yet hasten it.
Children of Adam, when Messengers of your own come to narrate to you My verses, those who are cautious and mend their ways will have nothing to fear neither shall they be saddened,
but, those who belie and grow proud against Our verses shall be the inhabitants of the Fire, and there they shall remain for ever.
Who is more harmful than he who invents a lie about Allah or belies His verses? Such shall have their share of the Book, and when Our Messengers come to take them away, they shall say to them: 'Where now are those whom you invoked, other than Allah' 'They have forsaken us' they will answer, and will bear witness against themselves that they were unbelievers.
He will say: 'Enter the Fire and join the nations of jinn and humans that have gone before you' As they enter, every nation will curse its sisternation, and when all are gathered in the pit, the last of them will say of the first: 'These, Lord, are those who led us astray. Give them a double punishment of the Fire. He will answer: 'For each double, although you do not know it'
Then, the first will say to the last: 'You were no better than us' So taste the punishment for what you have earned.
The gates of heaven shall not be opened for those who have belied and grew proud against Our verses; nor shall they enter Paradise until a camel shall pass through the eye of a needle. As such We shall recompense the sinners.
Gehenna (Hell) shall be their cradle, and layers of fire shall cover them. As such We recompense the harmdoers.
As for those who believe and do good works We never charge a soul with more than it can bear they are the companions of Paradise, and there they shall live for ever.
We shall strip away all rancor from their chests. Rivers shall flow underneath them, and they shall say: 'Praise be to Allah who has guided us to this. Had Allah not given us guidance we should not have been guided. The Messengers of our Lord surely came with the truth' Then they are called: 'This is the Paradise which you have inherited for what you did'
Then the companions of Paradise will call out to the companions of the Fire: 'What our Lord promised we have found to be true, have you too, found the promise of your Lord to be true' 'Yes' they shall answer, and a Caller will announce between them that the curse of Allah is upon the harmdoers,
who have barred others from the Path of Allah and sought to make it crooked, and who had no belief in the Everlasting Life.
And between them is a veil, and on the ramparts there shall stand men who will know each by their marks. To the companions of Paradise they shall call: 'Peace be upon you' Yet they did not enter it on account of their eagerness.
And when they turn their eyes towards the companions of the Fire, they will say: 'Lord, do not cast us among the harmdoers'
And the companions of the ramparts call to men whose marks they recognize: 'Neither your amassing nor your pride have availed you.
Are these whom you swore that Allah would never have mercy upon them' (To them it will be said:) 'Enter Paradise. You have nothing to fear neither will you be saddened'
The companions of the Fire will call out to the companions of Paradise: 'Pour upon us some water, or some of that which Allah has provided you' But they shall reply: 'Allah has forbidden both to the unbelievers,
who made their religion an amusement and play, and who were beguiled by their worldly life' On this Day We will forget them as they forgot the meeting of that Day; for they denied Our verses.
We have brought to them a Book which We have made plain based upon knowledge, a guidance and a mercy to believers.
Are they waiting but for its fulfillment? On the Day when it is realized, those who have forgotten it will say: 'The Messengers of our Lord have surely come with the truth. Have we then any intercessors to intercede for us, or shall we be returned to do other than that we have done' They have lost their souls, and that which they invented will have gone astray from them.
Your Lord is Allah, who, in six days created the heavens and the earth, and then willed to the Throne. He throws the veil of night over the day. Swiftly they follow one another. The sun, the moon, and the stars are compelled to His order. His is the creation, His is the command. Blessed is Allah, the Lord of the Worlds.
Supplicate to your Lord with humility and in secret. He does not love the transgressors.
Do not make mischief in the earth after it has been put right. Pray to Him with fear and hope; His Mercy is near to the righteous.
He sends forth the winds as carriers of the glad tidings between the hands of His Mercy, and when they have carried up a heavy cloud, We drive it on to some dead land and therewith send down water bringing forth all manner of fruit. As such We will raise the dead, in order that you remember.
Good land yields its vegetation by the permission of its Lord. While the corrupted yields only the scanty. So We make plain the verses to those who are thankful.
We sent forth Noah to his nation. He said: 'Worship Allah, my people for you have no god except He. I fear for you the punishment of a great Day.'
But the assembly of his nation said: 'We can see that you are in clear error.'
'I am not in error, my nation' he replied. 'I am a Messenger from the Lord of the Worlds
(sent) to convey to you the messages of my Lord and to advise you, for I know from Allah what you do not know.
Do you wonder that a Remembrance should come to you from your Lord to a man from yourselves in order that he may warn you and that you may be cautious so that mercy comes upon you'
(But) they belied him, so We saved him and those who were with him in the Ark, and We drowned those who belied Our verses. Surely, they were a blind nation.
And to (the people of) Aad We sent their brother, Hood. He said: 'Worship Allah, my nation, for you have no god except He. Will you not then be cautious'
The disbelieving assembly of his nation said: 'We see you in foolishness, and think that you are of the liars'
'My nation, there is no foolishness in me' he replied. 'I am a Messenger of the Lord of the Worlds
I deliver to you the messages of my Lord and I am your honest adviser.
Do you wonder that a remembrance should come to you from your Lord to a man from yourselves in order that he may warn you? Remember, that He has made you the heirs of Noah's nation and increased you in broad stature, remember the favors of Allah in order that you prosper'
They said: 'Have you come to us in order that we worship Allah alone and renounce that which our fathers worshipped? Bring down that with which you threaten us if you are from the truthful!
He answered: 'The punishment and wrath of your Lord has already fallen upon you. Would you dispute with me about names which you and your fathers have invented, and for which no authority has been sent down from Allah? Wait if you will, I am waiting with you'
We saved him and all who were with him through Our Mercy and annihilated those who belied Our verses. They were not believers!
And to Thamood We sent their brother Salih. He said: 'Worship Allah, my nation, for you have no god except He. A clear proof has come to you from your Lord. Here is the shecamel of Allah, a sign for you. Leave her to graze in the earth of Allah and do not touch her with evil, lest a painful punishment seizes you.
Remember, that He has made you the successor of 'Aad, and lodged you in the land. You have built palaces on its plains and hewed out houses in the mountains. Remember the favor of Allah and do not act mischievously in the earth, corrupting'
The proud assembly of his nation said to the weak? amongst them who believed: 'Do you really believe that Salih is sent from his Lord' They answered: 'We believe in that with which he was sent'
Those who were proud said: 'We disbelieve in that which you believed in'
(Then) they hamstrung the shecamel and defied the order of their Lord, saying to Salih: 'Bring down that which you have promised us if you truly are one of the Messengers'
Thereupon the earthquake seized them, at morning in their dwellings they were crouched, dead.
He turned from them, saying: 'I conveyed to you, my nation the Message of my Lord and gave you counsel; but you had no love for sincere advisers'
And Lot, who said to his nation: 'Do you commit such indecency (sodomy) in a way that no one has preceded you in the worlds?
You approach men lustfully instead of women. Truly, you are a nation who exceed (in sin)'
The only answer of his nation was: 'Expel them from your village. They are people who keep themselves purified'
We saved him and all his family, except his wife, who was made to remain,
and We rained down upon them a rain. So look how was the end of the evildoers.
And to Midian, their brother Shu'aib. He said: 'Worship Allah, my nation, for you have no god except He. A clear sign has come to you from your Lord. Give just weight, and full measure; and do not diminish the goods of people. Do not corrupt the land after it has been set right, that is best for you, if you are believers.
'Do not sit in every road, threatening and barring from the Path of Allah those who believed it, nor seek to make it crooked. Remember how He multiplied you when you were few in number. Consider the end of the corrupters.
If there are some among you who believe in that which I have been sent and others who disbelieve it, be patient until Allah shall judge between us. He is the best of judges'
The proud assembly of his nation said: 'We will expel you Shu'aib and those who believe with you from our village unless you return to our creed' He replied: 'Even though we hate it?
We would have invented lies about Allah if we returned to your creed from which Allah has saved us, it is not for us that we return into it again except if Allah, our Lord wills. For our Lord has embraced everything with knowledge, and in Allah we have put our trust. Our Lord, open between us and our nation with truth, You are the Best of openers'
But the unbelieving assembly of his nation said: 'If you follow Shu'aib, you shall assuredly be losers.'
So the earthquake seized them, at the morning they were crouched in their dwellings, dead.
It seemed as if those who had belied Shu'aib had never lived there. Those who belied Shu'aib were the losers.
He turned away from them saying: 'I conveyed to you, my nation, the messages of my Lord and advised you. How can I grieve for the unbelieving nation'
We sent no Prophet to a village but seized its inhabitants with misfortune and adversity in order that they might be humble in supplication.
Then We changed evil for good, until they multiplied and said: 'Our fathers were indeed touched by misfortune and adversity' So We seized them suddenly while they were unaware.
Had the people of the villages believed and been cautious, We would have opened upon them the blessings from heaven and earth. But they belied, and We seized them for what they earned.
Do the inhabitants of the villages feel secure from Our Might coming to them at night whilst they sleep?
Or do the inhabitants of the villages feel secure from Our Might coming to them in the midmorning while they play?
(In reply to your devising) do they feel secure from the devising of Allah? None feels secure from the devising of Allah except the loosing nation.
Is it not plain to those who inherit the earth after its inhabitants that if We willed We could smite them for their sins and set a seal upon their hearts, so that they do not hear.
Those villages We narrate their news to you. Their Messengers came to them with clear proofs, yet they would not believe what they had belied before; as such Allah seals the hearts of the unbelievers.
We did not find the covenant upheld by the majority of them, but We found most of them evildoers.
After those We sent forth Moses with Our signs to Pharaoh and his assembly, but with it they harmed. Look at the end of the corrupters.
Moses said: 'Pharaoh, I am a Messenger from the Lord of the Worlds,
incumbent upon me is that I say nothing of Allah except the truth. I bring you a clear proof from your Lord. So let the Children of Israel depart with me'
He answered: 'If you have come with a sign, show it to us if you are of the truthful'
He threw down his staff, and it was clearly a serpent.
Then he drew out his hand and it was luminous to the onlookers.
The assembly of Pharaoh's nation said: 'This man is a wellversed sorcerer
who seeks to drive you from your land what do you command'
Others said: 'Put them off a while, he and his brother, and send forth to your cities gatherers
to summon every wellversed sorcerer to you'
The sorcerers came to Pharaoh. They said: 'Shall we be rewarded if we are the winners'
'Yes' he answered, 'and you will be among those near'
They said: 'Moses, will you throw first or shall we be the throwers'
'Throw' he replied. And when they threw, they bewitched the people's eyes and terrified them, and produced great sorcery.
Then We revealed to Moses: 'Now, throw down your staff' And thereupon it swallowed up their false invention.
So, the truth prevailed and what they were doing was annulled;
they were defeated and turned belittled,
and the sorcerers prostrated themselves,
saying: 'We believe in the Lord of the Worlds,
the Lord of Moses and Aaron'
Pharaoh said: 'Do you believe in Him before I permit? This is a plot that you have contrived in the city in order to expel its people from it. Now you shall know!
I will cut off on opposite sides a hand and a foot, and then crucify you all'
They replied: 'We shall surely turn to our Lord.
You would take revenge on us only because we believed in the signs of our Lord when they came to us. Lord, pour patience upon us and let us die as submitters (Muslims)'
The assembly of Pharaoh's nation said: 'Will you allow Moses and his nation to corrupt in the land and to forsake you and your gods' He replied: 'We will put their sons to death and spare their women, indeed we are conquerors over them'
Moses said to his nation: 'Seek help from Allah and be patient. The earth belongs to Allah; He gives it as a heritage to whom He chooses amongst His worshipers. The outcome is for the cautious'
They replied: 'We were hurt before you came to us, and after you came to us' He said: 'Your Lord may destroy your enemies and make you inheritors in the land. Then He will see how you conduct yourselves'
We seized Pharaoh's people with years of drought and scarcity of fruit so that they might remember.
When good things came their way, they said: 'It is our due' but when evil befell them they blamed their ill fortune on Moses and those with him. Indeed their ill fortune was with Allah, though most of them did not know.
They said: 'Whatever sign you bring to us, to cast a spell upon us, we will not believe in you'
So We sent upon them floods, locusts, lice, frogs, and blood. (All these were) clear signs, yet they were proud against them, for they were wicked people.
And when the plague smote them, they said: 'Moses, pray to your Lord for us invoking the promise He has made with you. If you lift the plague from us, we will believe in you and let the Children of Israel go with you'
But when We had lifted the plague from them for a term which they had to reach, they broke their promise.
So We punished them and drowned them in the sea, for they had belied Our signs and gave no heed to them.
We gave the persecuted nation dominion over the eastern and western lands which We had blessed. So the Word of your Lord, the finest, was fulfilled for the Children of Israel because of their patience; and We destroyed the edifices, and towers of Pharaoh and whatsoever they manufactured.
and We moved the Children of Israel from one side of the sea to the other, and they came upon a nation zealously devoted to the idols they had. They said to Moses: 'Make a god for us, as they have gods' Moses replied: 'You are indeed an ignorant nation.
That which they are engaged upon shall be shattered and all their works are vain.
Should I seek any god for you except Allah? He has exalted you above the nations.
And that We saved you from Pharaoh's family, who had oppressed you cruelly, putting your sons to death and sparing your women. Surely, that was a great trial from your Lord'
We appointed for Moses thirty nights, and We completed them with ten more; so that the appointment with his Lord took forty nights. Moses said to Aaron, his brother: 'Take my place among my nation. Do what is right and do not follow the path of the corrupt doers'
And when Moses came at the appointed time and his Lord spoke to him, he said: 'Lord, let me see, that I can look at You' He replied: 'You shall not see Me. But look at the mountain; if it remains firm in its place, then shall you see Me' And when his Lord was revealed to the mountain and caused it to be crushed and leveled whereupon Moses fell down senseless, and when he recovered, he said: 'Exaltations to You! I repent to You. I am the first of believers'
He said: 'Moses, I have chosen you from all mankind with My Messages and My Words. Therefore, take what I have given you, and be among the thankful.'
We inscribed for him upon the Tablets all kinds of exhortation and clear explanations of all things. So take it forcefully, and order your nation to take what is best of it. I shall show you the home of the wicked.
From My signs I will turn away the unrightfully, arrogant in the land, so that even if they witness every sign they would not believe it. If they see the path of righteousness, they shall not take it as a path; but if they see the path of error, they shall take it for their path because they belied Our signs and were inattentive towards them.
Vain are the deeds of those who belie Our signs and the Everlasting Life. Shall they not be recompensed except for what they used to do?
In his absence, the nation of Moses made a calf from their ornaments, a body with a hollow sound. Did they not see that it could neither speak to them, nor guide them to a path? Yet they took it in worship and were harmdoers.
But when it landed in their hands and saw that they had strayed, they said: 'If our Lord does not have mercy on us and forgive us, we shall be lost'
And when Moses returned to his nation, angry and sorrowful, he said: 'Evil is what you have done in my absence! Would you hasten the retribution of your Lord' He threw down the Tablets, and seizing his brother by the head, dragged him towards him. 'Son of my mother' said (Aaron), 'the nation weakened me, and almost killed me. Do not let my enemies rejoice over me; do not number me among the harmdoers.'
'Lord' said Moses, 'forgive me and forgive my brother. Admit us to Your Mercy, for You are Most Merciful of the merciful'
Those who worshipped the calf incurred the Anger of their Lord and abasement in this life, and as such We recompense the forgers.
As for those who do evil and later repent and believe, your Lord is Forgiving, the Most Merciful thereafter.
When his anger abated, Moses took up the Tablets upon which was inscribed guidance and mercy to those who fear their Lord.
Moses chose from among his nation seventy men for Our appointment, and when the quake seized them, Moses said: 'My Lord, had it been Your Will, You would have destroyed them before, and me. Will You destroy us for that which the fools amongst us did? It is only Your trial by which You leave in error whom You will, and guide whom You will. You alone are our Guardian. Forgive us and have mercy on us, You are the Best of those who forgive.
Write for us what is good in this life and in the Everlasting Life. To You alone we turn' He replied: 'I will smite with My punishment whom I will; yet My Mercy embraces all things. I will write it (My Mercy) to those who are cautious, give the obligatory charity, and believe in Our verses;
and to those who shall follow the Messenger the Unlettered Prophet (Muhammad) whom they shall find written with them in the Torah and the Gospel. He will order kindness upon them and forbid them to do evil. He will make good things lawful to them and prohibit all that is foul. He will relieve them of their burdens and of the shackles that weigh upon them. Those who believe in him and honor him, those who aid him and follow the light sent forth with him, shall surely prosper'
Say: 'O mankind, I am the Messenger of Allah to you all. His is the kingdom in the heavens and the earth. There is no god except He. He revives and causes to die. Therefore, believe in Allah and His Messenger, the Unlettered Prophet, who believes in Allah and His Words. Follow him in order that you are guided.'
Yet among the people of Moses there was a nation who preached the truth and acted justly.
We divided them into twelve tribes, each a nation. And when his people demanded drink, We revealed to Moses: 'Strike the rock with your staff' Thereupon twelve springs gushed from the rock and each tribe knew its drinkingplace. We caused the clouds to cast their shadow over them, and sent down for them manna and quails, saying: 'Eat of the good things We have provided for you' Indeed, they did Us no wrong, but they wronged themselves.
When it was said to them: 'Dwell in this village, and eat of whatever you please; and say, "Unburdening" and enter the gate prostrating, We will forgive you your sins and increase the gooddoers'
The wicked amongst them changed what was said for other words. Therefore We sent down upon them from heaven a punishment for their evil doing.
Ask them about the village that overlooked the sea and what befell (its people) when they broke the Sabbath. Each Sabbath, their fish came swimming towards the shore, but on other days they did not come to them. As such We tempted them (the people) because they had done wrong.
And when some asked: 'Why do you admonish a nation whom Allah will destroy or sternly punish' They replied: '(Seeking) a pardon from your Lord, and in order that they may be cautious'
Therefore, when they forgot that of which they were reminded, We saved those who were forbidding evil, and seized the evildoers with an evil punishment for that which they used to do of evil.
And when they had scornfully persisted in what they had been forbidden, We said to them: 'Be apes, despised'
Then your Lord declared He would send against them he who would oppress them cruelly till the Day of Resurrection. Swift is the retribution of your Lord, yet surely He is Forgiving, the Most Merciful.
We dispersed them through the earth in nations some were righteous, others were not, and tested them with good and evil in order that they return.
Then others succeeded them who inherited the Book and availed themselves of the vanities of this lower world, saying: 'It will be forgiven us' But if similar vanities came their way, they would again take them. Have they not taken the covenant of the Book, which they have studied, to tell nothing of Allah except what is true? Surely, the Everlasting Life is better for the cautious, do you not understand!
As for those who hold fast to the Book and are steadfast in prayer, We do not waste the wage of the righteous.
When We suspended the mountain over them as though it were a shadow and they feared that it was falling down on them: (We said): 'Take forcefully that which We have given you and remember what it contains, in order that you keep from evil'
When your Lord brought forth descendants from the loins of Adam's children, and made them testify concerning themselves (He said): 'Am I not your Lord.' They replied: 'We bear witness (that You are)' Lest you should say on the Day of Resurrection: 'We had no knowledge of this'
or you say: 'Our forefathers were idolaters before, and we were the descendants after them, will You destroy us for the deeds of the vaindoers'
As such We make plain Our verses in order that they return.
Recite to them the news of he to whom We gave Our verses and who turned away from them; how satan overtook him so he was led astray.
Had it been Our will We would have raised with it, but he clung to this earthly life and succumbed to his fancies. His likeness was that of a dog, whether you chase it away or let it alone it pants. Such is the example of a nation who belie Our signs. Recount to them these narratives, in order that they reflect.
Evil is the example of those who belied Our verses; they wronged themselves.
He whom Allah guides is one that is guided, but he whom Allah leaves in error shall surely be the lost.
For Gehenna, We have created many jinn and many humans. They have hearts, with which they cannot understand; eyes, with which they do not see; and ears, with which they do not hear. They are like cattle, rather, they are the more misguided. Such are the heedless.
To Allah belongs the Finest Names, so call Him by them, and keep away from those who pervert them. They shall be recompensed for the things they did.
Among those whom We created there is a nation who guide with the truth and with it they are just.
As for those who belie Our verses, We will draw them on little by little, from where they cannot tell;
and I respite them, My stratagem is firm.
Have they not reflected? There is no madness in their companion, he is but a plain warner.
Will they not ponder upon the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and all that Allah created, and that it may be that their term is drawing near? So, in which speech will they believe thereafter?
None can guide those whom Allah leaves in error. He leaves them in their insolence, wandering blindly.
They ask you about the Hour and when it is to come. Say: 'None knows except my Lord. He alone will reveal it at the appointed time. It is heavy in the heavens and earth. It will not come to you but suddenly' They will question you, as though you had full knowledge of it. Say: 'Its knowledge is with Allah, though most people are unaware'
Say: 'I do not have the power to acquire benefits or to avert harm from myself, except by the Will of Allah. Had I possessed knowledge of the unseen, I would have availed myself of much that is good, and no harm would have touched me. But I am only a warner and a bearer of glad tidings for a nation who believe.
It is He who created you from a soul. From it He created its mate, so that he might reside with her. And when he had covered her, she conceived, and for a time her burden was light. She carried it with ease, but when it grew heavy, they both supplicated to Allah, their Lord: 'Grant us a goodly child and we will be among the thankful'
Yet when He gave both of them (the parents) a goodly child, they set up associates with Him, in return for what He had given them. Exalted be Allah above that they associate with Him.
Will they associate that which cannot create a thing while they are created?
They cannot help them, nor can they help themselves.
If you call them to guidance, they will not follow you. It is the same whether you call them or you are silent.
Those whom you invoke, other than Allah, are worshipers like yourselves. Call them, and let them answer you, if what you say is true!
Have they feet to walk with? Have they hands to punish with? Have they eyes to see with? Have they ears to hear with? Say: 'Call on your partners and then try to scheme against me. Give me no respite.
My Guardian is Allah, who has sent down the Book. He guards the righteous.
Those whom you invoke, other than Him, cannot help you, nor can they help themselves'
If you call them to guidance, they will not hear you. You see them looking towards you, but they cannot see.
Accept the easing, order with fine jurisprudence, and avoid the ignorant.
When satan provokes you seek refuge in Allah; He is the Hearing, the Knowing.
Indeed, when a visitation of satan touches the cautious (worshipers) they remember, and then see clearly.
And their brothers, they prolong them in error, and they will never stop.
When you do not bring them a verse, they say, 'Why have you not chosen one' Say: 'I follow only what is revealed to me from my Lord. This (Koran) is a veritable proof from your Lord, guidance and mercy for people who believe'
When the Koran is recited, listen to it in silence in order that Allah has mercy upon you.
Remember your Lord in your soul with humility and fear, and not with a loud voice, morning and evening, and do not be among the inattentive.
Those who are with your Lord are not too proud to worship Him. They exalt Him and to Him they prostrate.
