A caller supplicated about a punishment to fall on
the unbelievers which none can prevent.
(A punishment) from Allah, the Owner of the Elevated Passages.
To Him the angels and the Spirit (Gabriel) ascend in a day, the measure of which is fifty thousand years.
Therefore be patient, with a beautiful patience;
they see it as being far off;
but We see it near.
On that Day the heaven shall become like molten copper,
and the mountains shall be like puffs of wool.
No loyal friend will ask another loyal friend
though they are in sight of each other. To ransom himself from the punishment of that Day, the sinner will wish that he might even ransom himself by his sons,
his companion (wife), his brother,
the kinsmen who gave him shelter,
and whosoever is in the earth, altogether, so that it might save him.
No, in truth, it is a Furnace!
It snatches away by the scalps,
and it shall call him who withdrew and turned his back
and amassed (riches) and hoarded.
Indeed, the human was created grudging and impatient.
When evil comes upon him he is impatient;
but when good comes upon him, he is grudging
except those that pray
who are constant in prayer;
who, from their wealth is a known right
for the impoverished nonrequester and the requester,
who confirm the Day of Reckoning
and go in fear of the punishment of their Lord,
for none is secure from the punishment of their Lord,
who guard their privates
except from their wives and what their right hands own, for these they are not blameworthy.
But whosoever seeks beyond that, they are the transgressors.
(Those) who keep their trusts and their covenant,
and standby their witnessing,
and who are constant in their prayers.
Those are highly honored in the Gardens.
But what is the matter with the unbelievers, that they strain their glances continuously towards them,
on the right and on the left in groups?
What, is every one of them eager to be admitted to the Garden of Bliss?
Not at all, for We have created them of what they know.
No, I swear by the Lord of the Easts and the Wests that We have the ability
to exchange them with others better than they; nothing can outstrip Us!
So leave them alone to plunge and play, until they encounter the Day which they are promised;
the Day when they shall rush from their graves, as if they were hurrying to a raised flag,
their eyes are humbled and they are covered with humiliation. Such is the Day that they were promised.
