We sent Noah to his nation, saying: 'Give warning to your nation before a painful punishment overtakes them'
He said: 'My nation, I am a clear warner for you.
Worship Allah, fear Him, and obey me.
He will forgive you your sins and respite you till an appointed term. When the term of Allah arrives it cannot be deferred; if you but knew'
'My Lord' said he, 'night and day I have called my nation,
but my call has only increased them in running away.
Each time I called them so that You might forgive them, they thrust their fingers in their ears and wrapped themselves in their garments, and persisted becomingvery proud.
I called to them clearly,
and indeed, I spoke to them both publicly and in secret:
"Ask for forgiveness of your Lord," I said. "Surely, He is the Forgiver.
He will let loose the sky upon you in abundance
and give to you wealth and sons, and provide you with gardens and rivers.
What is the matter with you that you do not want the Greatness of Allah,
He has created you by stages!
Have you not seen how Allah created the seven heavens one above the other,
setting in them the moon as a light and the sun as a lantern?
Allah has caused you to grow out of the earth,
and to it He will return you. Then, He will bring you forth.
Allah has made the earth spread out for you
so that you walk in its spacious paths.'
Noah said: 'My Lord, they have rebelled against me and followed he whose wealth and offspring increase him only in loss,
they have devised a mighty plot,
and said: 'Do not renounce your gods, do not leave waddan or suwa'an or yaghutha, or ya'uqa, or nasra'
And they have led many astray. (Noah supplicated saying): 'Allah, do not increase the harmdoers except in error'
So because of their sins they were drowned and admitted into the Fire. They found none to help them other than Allah.
And Noah (supplicated) saying: 'My Lord, do not leave a single unbeliever upon the earth.
Surely, if You leave them they will mislead Your worshipers and father none but the immoral, and unbelievers.
Forgive me, My Lord, and my parents, and whosoever seeks refuge in my house as a believer, and the believers men and women alike, and do not increase the harmdoers except in ruin'
