Say: 'It is revealed to me that a party of jinn listened then said: "We have indeed heard a wonderful Koran,
that guides to the Right Path. We believe in it and we will not associate anyone with our Lord.
He exalted be the Majesty of our Lord, who has neither taken to Himself a wife, nor a son!
The ignorant fool among us has spoken outrageously against Allah,
we never thought that either human or jinn would ever tell a lie against Allah!'
But there were certain men from mankind who would take refuge with certain males from the jinn and they increased them in tyranny.
Like you, they thought that Allah would never raise the dead.
(The jinn continued saying): "We made our way towards heaven, but we found it filled with stern guards and a flame.
There, we would sit to eavesdrop, but now an eavesdropper finds a flame in wait for him.
And so we do not know whether evil is intended for those on earth, or whether their Lord intends to guide them.
Some of us are righteous, but some are otherwise, we are sects that differ.
We know that we cannot frustrate Allah in the earth, nor can we frustrate Him by flight.
When we heard the Guidance, we believed in it, and whosoever believes in his Lord shall fear neither shortage nor injustice.
Some of us have surrendered (Muslims) and some of us have deviated. Those who surrendered sought the Right Path,
but those who have deviated shall become the fuel of Gehenna (Hell).
If they had followed the Path We would give to them abundant water to drink,
and tested them with it. And whosoever turns away from his Lord's Remembrance, He will hurl him into a stern punishment.
Mosques belong to Allah, so do not call to anyone else, other than Allah.
When the worshiper of Allah stood supplicating to Him, they swarmed around him (Prophet Muhammad).
Say: 'I supplicate only to my Lord and I do not associate any with Him'
Say: 'Indeed, I possess no power over you, either for harm or for guidance'
Say: 'None shall protect me from Allah, and other than Him, I will find no refuge,
except a deliverance from Allah and His Messages. He who disobeys Allah and His Messenger, for him is the Fire of Gehenna, which he will be in for ever.
When they see that which they were promised they shall know who is weaker in helpers and fewer in numbers.
Say: 'I do not know whether that which you are promised is near, or whether my Lord will set for it a time.
He is the Knower of the Unseen and does not disclose His Unseen to anyone,
except only to a Messenger that He has chosen, and He sends guardians before him and behind him,
so that He may know that they have delivered the Messages of their Lord and He encompasses all that is with them, and He has counted everything innumbers'
