Indeed, there came upon the human a period of time when he was an unremembered thing.
We have created the human from a (sperm) drop, a mixture, testing him; We made him to hear and see.
Indeed, We have guided him to the path, he is either grateful or ungrateful.
Indeed, for the unbelievers We have prepared chains, fetters and a Blazing (Fire).
But the righteous shall drink of a goblet mixed with camphor;
a fountain at which the worshipers of Allah drink and make it gush forth abundantly;
they who keep their vows and fear a Day whose evil is spread;
who give food, for the love of Him to the needy, the orphan, and the captive,
(saying): 'We feed you only desirous of the Face of Allah; we seek of you neither recompense nor thanks,
for we fear from our Lord a stern, frownful Day'
So Allah will save them from the evil of that Day and has secured for them radiance and joyfulness,
and recompense them for their patience with a Garden, and robes of silk.
Reclining there upon couches, they shall see neither the sun nor the moon.
Near them shall be its shades with its clusters hung gently down,
and passed around them shall be silver vessels, and crystal goblets,
goblets of silver that they have precisely measured.
And they shall be given to drink from a cup whose mixture is ginger,
from a fountain called Salsabila.
Immortal youths will go about them, when you see them, you would suppose them to be scattered pearls.
When you see them, you see bliss, and a great Kingdom.
Upon them there will be garments of green silk, rich brocade, and they will be adorned with bracelets of silver. Their Lord will give them a pure beverage to drink.
'See, this is your recompense, your striving is thanked'
We have indeed, sent down to you the Koran, a (clear) sending,
therefore be patient under the Judgement of your Lord, and do not obey either the sinner or the unbeliever.
And, remember the Name of your Lord at the dawn and in the evening;
and in the night prostrate to Him; and exalt Him for a long night.
Indeed, these love the hasty life, and are heedless and leave behind them a heavy Day.
We created them, and We strengthened their joints, but, when We will, We shall indeed exchange their likes.
This is indeed a Reminder, so that he who will, takes a path to his Lord.
Yet you will not unless Allah wills; surely, Allah is the Knower, the Wise.
He is Merciful to whom He will; but, for the harmdoers He has prepared for them a painful punishment.
