By (the wind) those sent (as horses') mane (in succession),
storming tempestuously
and by the scatterers scattering (rain)
then the criterion (the verses of Koran), separating
and those (angels) dropping, reminding
excusing or warning,
surely, that which you have been promised is about to fall!
When the stars are extinguished,
and when the sky is rent asunder
and the mountains scattered,
and when the Messengers' time is set
to what day shall they be deferred?
Upon the Day of Decision!
Would that you knew what the Day of Decision is!
Woe on that Day to those who belied it!
Did We not destroy the ancients
and let the latter follow them?
As such shall We deal with the sinners.
Woe on that Day to those who belied it!
Did We not create you from a weak water,
which We placed within a sure lodging
for an appointed term?
We determined, how excellent a Determiner are We!
Woe on that Day to those who belied it!
Have We not made the earth a housing
for both the living and the dead?
Have We not placed high mountains upon it and filled you with sweet water?
Woe on that Day to those who belied it!
Depart to that which you belied!
Depart into the shadow of three masses,
wherein there is neither shade, nor freeing from the blazing flames
it throws spits as (high as a huge) palace,
as black camels.
Woe on that Day to those who belied it!
This is the Day they shall not speak,
nor shall they be given permission, so that they can apologize.
Woe on that Day to those who belied it!
Such is the Day of Decision. We will gather you with the ancients.
If you are cunning, then try your cunning against Me!
Woe on that Day to those who belied it!
Indeed, the cautious, shall live amid shades and fountains
and have such fruits as they desire.
(It shall be said to them): 'Eat and drink, with a good appetite, for all that you did'
As such We recompense those who did good.
Woe on that Day to those who belied it!
'Eat and enjoy yourselves a little, for you are sinners'
Woe on that Day to those who belied it!
When it is said to them: 'Bow yourselves' they do not bow.
Woe on that Day to those who belied it!
After this, in what discourse will they believe?
