By the pluckers (the angels of death), violently plucking (the souls of the unbelievers),
by the drawers (the angels of death), gently drawing (the souls of the believers),
by the swimmers (angels) swimming gently
and the outstrippers (angels), outstripping,
by the managers (angels) affair.
On the Day, the shiverer shivers
followed by the succeeding,
hearts will throb on that Day
and their eyes will be humbled.
They say: 'What, are we being restored as we were before,
even after we are fragmented bones'
They will say: 'Then we are returned lost'
But it will be only a single blow,
and they will be upon the surface of the earth (alive).
Have you received the story of Moses?
His Lord called to him in the Sacred Valley of Towa,
saying 'Go to Pharaoh, he has become exceedingly insolent,
and say: "Will you purify yourself,
that I might guide you to your Lord, so that you fear (Him)."
He showed him the mighty sign,
but he belied and disobeyed,
and hastily turned away,
then, he gathered, proclaimed, then said:
'I am your lord, the most high'
So Allah seized him with the punishment of the Everlasting Life, and of this world.
Surely, in this there is a lesson for he that fears!
What, are you harder to create than the heaven which He has built?
He raised it high and leveled it,
and darkened its night and brought forth its morning.
And the earth He extended after that;
and then brought from it its water and pastures.
And the mountains He set firm
an enjoyment for you and your herds.
But when the Great Catastrophe comes,
the Day when the human will remember what he has worked for,
and when Hell is advanced for whoever sees,
then as for whosoever was insolent
preferring the present life,
surely, Hell will be their refuge.
But, whosoever feared the standing before his Lord and prevented the self from desires,
indeed, their refuge shall be Paradise.
They will question you about the Hour: 'When shall it be'
But how are you to know?
Its final end is for your Lord.
You are but a warner for those who fear it.
On the Day when they behold it, it will be as if they had lingered but an evening, or, a morning.
