They ask you about the spoils (of war). Say: 'The spoils belong to Allah and the Messenger. Therefore, have fear of Allah and set things right between you. Obey Allah and His Messenger, if you are believers'
Indeed the believers are those whose hearts quake at the mention of Allah, and when His verses are recited to them it increased them in faith. They are those who put their trust in their Lord.
Those who pray steadfastly, and spend of that which We have provided them,
those are, in truth, the believers. They shall have degrees with their Lord and forgiveness, and a generous provision.
It is like when your Lord caused you to leave your home with the truth, though some of the believers disliked it.
They argued with you about the truth after it had been made clear, as though they were being led to certain death while looking.
(Remember) when Allah promised to grant you one of the two parties (at Badr), and you wished for the one that was not strong. Allah wanted to establish the truth by His Words and to sever the unbelievers to the last,
in order that He might verify the truth and annul the falsehood, even though the wrongdoers hated it.
And when you (Prophet Muhammad) prayed to your Lord for help, He answered: 'I am sending to your aid a thousand angels in succession'
Allah only made it to be glad tidings and so that your hearts may be satisfied; victory comes only from Allah; He is Almighty, Wise.
When you were overcome by sleep, as security from Him, He sent down water from the sky to cleanse you and to purify you of satan's filth, to strengthen your hearts and to steady your footsteps.
And when Allah revealed to the angels, saying: 'I shall be with you. Give courage to the believers. I shall cast terror into the hearts of the unbelievers. Strike them above the necks, smite their finger tips'
This is because they had made a breach with Allah and His Messenger. He who makes a breach with Allah and His Messenger indeed, Allah is stern in retribution.
'That for you, so taste it, the punishment of the Fire is for the unbelievers'
Believers, when you encounter unbelievers on the march do not turn your backs to them in flight.
If anyone on that day turns his back to them in flight, except when maneuvering to fight, or to join another party, he shall be laden with the Anger of Allah and Gehenna shall be his refuge an evil arrival.
It was not you who killed them, but Allah slew them, neither was it you who threw at them. Allah threw at them in order that He confers on the believers a fair benefit. Indeed, Allah is Hearing, Knowing.
Allah will surely weaken the guile of the unbelievers.
If you were seeking a victory, victory has now come to you. If you desist, it will be better for you. If you resume We will return, and even if your forces are numerous, they shall not help you at all. And Allah is with the believers.
Believers, obey Allah and His Messenger, and do not turn away from him when you are hearing.
Do not be like those who say: 'We hear' but they do not listen.
The worst beasts before Allah are those who are deaf, dumb, and do not understand.
Indeed, had Allah known any good in them, He would have let them hear. But even if He had made them hear, they would have turned away, swerving aside.
Believers, respond to Allah and the Messenger when he calls you to that which revives you. Know that Allah is between the person and his heart, and that toHim you shall all be gathered.
And be cautious against a sedition that will not smite the harmdoers alone. Know that the punishment of Allah is Stern.
And remember how He gave you shelter when you were few in number and considered weak in the land, ever fearing that the people would snatch you away; but He gave you refuge and supported you with His victory and provided you with goodness, so that you might give thanks.
Believers, do not betray Allah and the Messenger, nor knowingly betray your trust.
Know that your children and your wealth are but a temptation, and that the reward with Allah is great.
Believers, if you fear Allah, He will give you a criteria and cleanse you of your sins and forgive you. Allah is the Owner of great bounty.
And when the unbelievers plotted against you (Prophet Muhammad). They sought to either take you captive or have you killed, or expelled. They plotted but Allah (in reply) also plotted. Allah is the Best in plotting.
Whenever Our verses are recited to them, they say: 'We have heard them, if we wished, we could speak its like. They are but tales of the ancients'
When they say: 'O Allah, if this is indeed the truth from You, rain down upon us stones from heaven or bring us a painful punishment.'
But Allah was not to punish them whilst you were living in their midst. Nor would Allah punish them if they repeatedly ask forgiveness of Him.
And why should Allah not punish them, when they have barred others from the Sacred Mosque, although they were not its guardians? Its only guardians are the cautious, though most of them do not know.
Their prayers at the Sacred House are nothing but whistling and clapping. Therefore, taste the punishment for your disbelief.
Those who disbelieve spend their wealth to bar (others) from the Path of Allah. They will spend it; but it will become a regret for them, then they will be overcome. The unbelievers shall be gathered in Gehenna,
in order that Allah will separate the wicked from the good. He will heap the wicked one upon another, and then heap them together and cast them in Gehenna those shall be the losers.
Tell the unbelievers that if they abandon their ways He will forgive them what is past; but, if they return, that was indeed the way of their forefathers who have passed away.
Fight them until persecution is no more and the Religion of Allah reigns supreme. If they desist, Allah sees the things they do;
but if they turn away, know that Allah is your guardian, (He is) the best Guardian and the best Giver of victory.
And know that one fifth of whatever you take as spoils belong to Allah, the Messenger, kinsmen of the Messenger, the orphans, the needy, and the destitute traveler; if you believe in Allah and what We sent down to Our worshiper on the day of victory, the day when the two armies met. Allah has power over all things.
And when you were encamped on the nearside and they (the unbelievers) on the farther side, with the caravan below, had you made an appointment with them, you would have surely failed to keep it; but Allah sought to accomplish what He had ordained, so that by clear evidence, he who was destined to perish might perish, and he who was destined to live might live. Surely, Allah is Hearing, Knowing.
And when Allah made them appear to you in a vision as a small band, had He showed them to you as many, your courage would have failed you and you would have quarreled over the affair. But Allah saved; He knows the inner most thoughts in the chests.
And when you met them, He showed them in your eyes as being few, and decreased (your number) in their eyes so that Allah might determine what was ordained. To Allah all matters return.
Believers, when you meet an army stand firm and remember Allah abundantly, in order that you are prosperous.
Obey Allah and His Messenger and do not dispute with one another lest you should lose courage and your resolve weaken. Have patience Allah is with those who are patient.
Do not be like those who left their homes elated with insolence and showing off to people, barring others from the Path of Allah but Allah encompasses what they do.
And when satan made their foul deeds seem fair to them. He said: 'No one shall conquer you this day. I shall be your savior' But when the two armies came within sight of each other, he took to his heels, saying: 'I reject you, for I can see what you cannot. I fear Allah, Allah is Stern in retribution'
And when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was sickness said: 'Those, their religion has deceived them' But whosoever puts his trust in Allah, indeed Allah is Mighty, Wise.
If you could see the angels when they carry off the souls of the unbelievers, beating their faces and their backs, saying: 'Taste the punishment of Burning!
That is for what your hands have forwarded, Allah is not unjust to His worshipers'
Like Pharaoh's family and those who have gone before them, they disbelieved the signs of Allah. Therefore, Allah seized them in their sinfulness. Mighty is Allah and stern in retribution.
This is because Allah would never change His favor that He bestowed upon a nation until they change what is in their hearts. Allah is Hearing, Knowing.
Like Pharaoh's family and those who have gone before them, they belied the signs of their Lord, and so We destroyed them for their sins and drowned Pharaoh's family. They were all harmdoers.
Indeed, the basest creatures before Allah are the unbelievers for they will not believe;
those with whom you have made a treaty, then break their treaty with you every time; having no fear (of Allah),
if you meet them in battle, cause their example to scatter those behind them so that they remember.
If you fear treachery from any of your allies, you can dissolve with them equally. Allah does not love the treacherous.
Do not suppose that the unbelievers have outstripped (Allah). They cannot frustrate Me.
Muster against them whatever you are able of force and tethers (ropes) of horses, so that you strike terror into the enemies of Allah and your enemy, and others besides them whom you do not know but Allah does. All that you spend in the Way of Allah shall be repaid to you. You shall not be wronged.
If they incline to peace, incline to it also, and put your trust in Allah. Surely, He is the Hearing, the Knowing.
Should they seek to deceive you, Allah is sufficient for you. It is He who supported you with His victory and with believers,
and brought their hearts together. If you had given away all the riches of the earth, you could not have so united them, but Allah has united them. He isAlmighty, Wise.
O Prophet, Allah suffices you and whosoever follows you of the believers.
O Prophet, urge the believers to fight. If there are twenty patient men among you, you shall overcome two hundred, and if there are a hundred, they shall overcome a thousand unbelievers, for they are a nation who do not understand.
Allah has now lightened it for you, for He knows that there is weakness amongst you. If there are a hundred patient men among you, they shall overcome two hundred; and if there are a thousand, they shall, by the permission of Allah, defeat two thousand. Allah is with the patient.
It is not for any Prophet to have prisoners in order to slaughter many in the land. You want the gains of this life, and Allah wants the Everlasting Life, and Allah is Mighty, Wise.
Had there not been a previous writing from Allah, you would have been afflicted by a mighty punishment.
Eat of what you have taken from the spoils; such is lawful and good, and fear Allah. Allah is Forgiving and Most Merciful.
O Prophet, say to those you have taken captive in your hand: 'If Allah finds goodness in your hearts, He will give you that which is better than what has been taken from you, and He will forgive you. Allah is Forgiving, the Most Merciful'
But if they seek to betray you, they had betrayed Allah before, but He has let you overcome them. Allah is the Knower, the Wise.
Those who believe and migrated, and fought for the Cause of Allah with their wealth and their persons; and those who sheltered them and helped them shall be guides to each other. And those who believe, but have not emigrated you have no guidance towards them till they emigrate. But if they seek your help in the cause of your religion, it is your duty to help them, except against a nation with whom you have a treaty. Allah sees the things you do.
The unbelievers, they are guides of one another. Unless you do this, there will be persecution in the land and great corruption.
Those who believe and migrated from their homes and fought for the Way of Allah, and those who have sheltered them and helped them they are truly the believers. Theirs shall be forgiveness and a generous provision.
And those who believed afterwards and emigrated, and struggled with you they are of you. And in the Book of Allah, the near kinsmen deserve one another (in inheritance). Allah has knowledge of all things.
