An acquittal from Allah and His Messenger to the idolaters with whom you have made agreements;
'For four months you shall journey freely in the land. But know that you shall not render Allah incapable, and that Allah will humiliate the unbelievers'
A proclamation from Allah and His Messenger, to the people on the day of the Grand Pilgrimage; 'Allah rejects, and His Messenger (rejects) the idolaters. So if you repent, that will be better for you; but if you turn your backs, know that you cannot frustrate Allah. And give glad tidings to the unbelievers of a painful punishment,
except those idolaters who have fully honored their treaties with you and aided none against you. With these fulfill your covenant till their term. Surely, Allah loves the righteous.
When the sacred months are over, slay the idolaters wherever you find them. Take them and confine them, then lie in ambush everywhere for them. If they repent and establish the prayer and pay the obligatory charity, let them go their way. Allah is Forgiving and the Most Merciful.
If an idolater seeks asylum with you, give him protection in order that he hears the Word of Allah, and then convey him to his place of safety, because they are a nation who do not know.
How can the idolaters have any treaty with Allah and His Messenger, except those with whom you have made treaties by the Sacred Mosque? So long as they are straight with you, so be straight with them. Allah loves the righteous.
How? If they prevail against you they will respect neither agreements nor ties of kindred. They satisfy you with their tongues, but their hearts are averse; and most of them are wicked.
They sell the verses of Allah for a small price and bar others from His Path. Evil is what they have been doing.
They honor with the believers neither bonds nor treaties. Such are the transgressors.
If they repent and establish the prayer and pay the obligatory charity, they shall become your brothers in the religion. So We make plain Our verses for a nation that knows.
But if, after coming to terms with you, they break their oaths and revile your belief, fight the leaders of the disbelief for they have no oaths in order that they will desist.
Will you not fight against those who have broken their oaths and conspired to expel the Messenger? They were the first to attack you. Do you fear them? Surely, Allah has better rights that you fear Him, if you are believers.
Fight them, Allah will punish them with your hands and degrade them. He will grant you victory over them and heal the chests of a believing nation.
He will take away all anger from their hearts: Allah turns to whomsoever He will. Allah is Knowing, Wise.
Did you suppose that you would be left before Allah has known those of you who fought and did not take a confidant other than Allah, His Messenger, and the believers? Allah is Aware of what you do.
Idolaters should not inhabit the mosques of Allah bearing witness against themselves with disbelief. Those, their deeds have been annulled, and in the Fire they shall live for ever.
None should inhabit the mosques of Allah except those who believe in Allah and the Last Day, establish their prayers and pay the obligatory charity, and fear none except Allah. May these be among the guided.
Do you consider giving drink to the pilgrims and inhabiting the Sacred Mosque is the same as one who believes in Allah and the Last Day, and struggles in the Way of Allah? These are not held equal by Allah. Allah does not guide the harmdoers.
Those who believe, and migrated, and struggle in the Way of Allah with their wealth and their persons are greater in rank with Allah. It is they who are the winners.
Their Lord gives them glad tidings of mercy from Him, and pleasure; for them await gardens in which there is eternal bliss.
where they shall live for ever. The wage with Allah is great indeed.
Believers, do not take your fathers or your brothers for a guide if they love disbelief rather than belief. Whosoever of you takes them for guides are the harmdoers.
Say: 'If your fathers, your sons, your brothers, your wives, your tribes, the property you have acquired, the merchandise you fear will not be sold, and the homes you love, are dearer to you than Allah, His Messenger and the struggling for His Way, then wait until Allah shall bring His command. Allah does not guide the evildoers'
Allah has helped you on many a battlefield. In the Battle of Hunain, when your numbers were pleasing you they availed you nothing; the earth, for all its vastness, seemed to close in upon you and you turned your backs and fled.
Then, Allah caused His tranquility (sechina) to descend upon His Messenger and the believers; He sent legions you did not see and sternly punished the unbelievers. Such is the recompense of the unbelievers.
Yet thereafter, Allah turns to whom He will. He is the Forgiving, the Most Merciful.
Believers, the idolaters are unclean. Do not let them approach the Sacred Mosque after this year. If you fear poverty, Allah, if He wills, will enrich you through His bounty. He is Knowing, Wise.
Fight those who neither believe in Allah nor the Last Day, who do not forbid what Allah and His Messenger have forbidden, and do not embrace the religion of the truth, being among those who have been given the Book (Bible and the Torah), until they pay tribute out of hand and have been humiliated.
The Jews say Ezra is the son of Allah, while the Christians (who follow Paul) say the Messiah is the son of Allah. Such are their assertions, by which they imitate those who disbelieved before. Allah fights them! How perverted are they!
They take their rabbis and monks as lords besides Allah, and the Messiah, son of Mary, though they were ordered to worship but one God, there is no god except He. Exalted is He above that they associate with Him!
They desire to extinguish the Light of Allah with their mouths; but Allah seeks only to perfect His Light, though the unbelievers hate it.
It is He who has sent forth His Messenger with guidance and the religion of truth to uplift it above every religion, no matter how much the idolaters hate it.
Believers, many are the rabbis and monks who in falsehood defraud people of their possessions and bar people from the Path of Allah. Give glad tidings of a painful punishment to those who treasure gold and silver and do not spend it in the Way of Allah.
On that Day they (the treasures) will be heated in the fire of Gehenna (Hell), and their foreheads, sides, and backs will be branded with them, and told: 'These are the things which you have treasured. Taste then that which you were treasuring'
The number of the months, with Allah, is twelve in the Book of Allah, the day when He created the heavens and the earth; of these, four are sacred. That is the right religion. Therefore, do not wrong yourselves in them and fight against the unbelievers all together as they themselves fight against you all together; know that Allah is with the cautious.
The postponement of sacred months is an increase in disbelief in which the unbelievers are misguided. They allow it one year and forbid it another year, so that they can make up for the months that Allah has sanctified so making lawful what Allah has forbidden. Their foul acts seem fair to them Allah does not guide the unbelievers.
Believers, why is it that when it is said to you: 'March in the Way of Allah' you linger with heaviness in the land? Are you content with this life rather than theEverlasting Life? Yet the enjoyment of this life in (comparison to) the Everlasting Life is little.
If you do not go forth, He will punish you with a painful punishment and replace you by another nation. You will in no way harm Him; for Allah has power over all things.
If you do not help him, Allah will help him as He helped him when he was driven out with one other (Abu Bakr) by the unbelievers. When the two were in the cave, he said to his companion: 'Do not sorrow, Allah is with us' Then Allah caused His tranquility (shechina) to descend upon him and supported him with legions (of angels) you did not see, and He made the word of the unbelievers the lowest, and the Word of Allah is the highest. Allah is Mighty, Wise.
Whether lightly or heavily, march on and fight for the Way of Allah, with your wealth and your persons. This will be best for you, if you but knew.
Had the gain been immediate or the journey easy, they would have followed you; but the distance seemed far to them. Yet they will swear by Allah: 'Had we been able, we would have gone out with you' They bring destruction upon their souls. Allah knows that they are lying.
Allah has forgiven you! Why did you give them leave (to stay behind) until it was clear to you which of them was truthful and knew those who lied?
Those who believe in Allah and the Last Day will not ask your permission so that they may struggle with their wealth and their selves. Allah knows best the righteous.
Only those who ask your permission do not believe in Allah and the Last Day and whose hearts are filled with doubt. And in their doubt, they waiver.
Had they intended to set forth with you, they would have prepared themselves for it. But Allah did not like their going forth and held them back, and it was said: 'Stay back with those who stay back'
Had they gone forth among you, they would only have increased your burden, and run to and fro in your midst, seeking to stir up sedition between you; and some of you would listen to them; and Allah knows the harmdoers.
Beforehand they had already sought to stir up sedition, and turned things upside down for you, until the truth came, and the command of Allah appeared, although they were averse.
Among them are some that say: 'Give us leave and do not expose us to temptation' Surely, they have already succumbed to temptation. Gehenna shall encompass the unbelievers.
If good comes to you, it grieves them; but if hardship befalls you, they say: 'We have taken our precautions' and they turn away, rejoicing.
Say: 'Nothing will befall us except what Allah has ordained. He is our Guardian. In Allah, let the believers put their trust'
Say: 'Are you waiting for anything to befall us except one of the two excellent things (victory or martyrdom)? We are waiting for the punishment of Allah to smite you, either from Him or at our hands. Wait if you will, we are waiting'
Say: 'Whether you spend voluntarily or reluctantly it shall not be accepted from you; for you are a wicked nation'
Nothing prevents their offerings from being accepted except that they do not believe in Allah and His Messenger. They do not come to the prayer except lazily and spend grudgingly.
Let neither their wealth nor their children please you. Through these Allah seeks to punish them in this life, and that their souls depart while they are unbelievers.
They swear by Allah that they belong with you, yet they are not of you. They are a nation that are afraid.
If they could find a shelter or caverns, or any place to creep into they will turn stampeding to it.
There are some among them who find fault with you concerning the distribution of alms. If a share is given to them they are contented, but if they receive nothing then they are angry.
Would that they were wellpleased with what Allah and His Messenger have given them, and would say: 'Allah is sufficient for us. Allah will provide for us from His abundance, and so will His Messenger. To Allah, we hope'
The obligatory charity shall be only for the poor and the needy, and for those who work to collect it, and to influence hearts (to belief), for ransoming captives, and debtors in the Way of Allah and the destitute traveler. It is an obligation from Allah. Allah is Knowing, Wise.
And there are others among them who hurt the Prophet saying: 'He lends an ear (to everything)' Say: 'He lends an ear of good for you; he believes in Allah and trusts the believers, and he is a mercy to the believers among you. Those who hurt the Messenger of Allah for them there is a painful punishment'
They swear in the Name of Allah in order to please you. But it is more just that they should please Allah and His Messenger if they are believers.
Are they not aware that whosoever opposes Allah and His Messenger shall live for ever in the Fire of Gehenna? That surely is the greatest degradation.
The hypocrites are afraid lest a chapter be sent down against them telling them what is in their hearts. Say: 'Mock if you will; Allah will surely bring forth what you are fearing'
If you question them, they will say: 'We were only plunging and playing' Say: 'Were you mocking Allah, His verses, and His Messenger?
Do not make excuses. You have disbelieved after you believed. If we forgive some of you, We will punish others, for they were sinners'
Be they men or women, the hypocrites are all alike. They order what is evil, forbid what is just, and tighten their purse strings. They forsook Allah, so Allah forsook them. Surely, the hypocrites are evildoers.
Allah has promised the hypocrites, both men and women, and the unbelievers the Fire of Gehenna. They shall live in it for ever. It is sufficient for them. Allah has cursed them and for them is a lasting punishment.
You are like those before you. They were stronger than you in might, and had greater riches and more children. They took enjoyment in their share, so do you take enjoyment in your share as those before you took enjoyment in their share. You have plunged as they plunged. Those, their works are annulled, failed in this world and in the Everlasting Life, those, they are the losers.
Have they not heard the news of those who have gone before them? The news of the nations of Noah, Aad and Thamood, of Abraham's nation, and the people of Midian and the ruined cities? Their Messengers showed them clear signs. Allah did not harm them, but they harmed themselves.
The believers, both men and women, are guides to each other. They order what is just and forbid what is evil; they establish their prayers and pay the obligatory charity and obey Allah and His Messenger. On these Allah will have mercy. He is Mighty, Wise.
Allah has promised the believing men and women gardens underneath which rivers flow, in which they shall live for ever. Goodly mansions in the Gardens of Eden, and the pleasure from Allah which is greater. That is the greatest winning.
O Prophet, struggle with the unbelievers and the hypocrites and be harsh with them. Gehenna shall be their refuge an evil arrival.
They swear by Allah that they said nothing. Yet they did utter the word of disbelief and disbelieved after they had submitted. They intended what they never attained to, and took revenge only that Allah enriched them, and His Messenger, of His Bounty. If they repent, it will indeed be better for them; but if they turn away, Allah will sternly punish them both in this world and in the Everlasting Life. They have none on earth to protect or help them.
Some of them have made a covenant with Allah, 'If Allah gives to us of His bounty, we will give charity and be of the righteous'
But when Allah had bestowed His bounty on them they became greedy and turned away, swerving aside.
He has caused hypocrisy to be in their hearts till the Day they meet Him, because they have changed what they promised Allah and because they were liars.
Did they not know that Allah knows their secret and what they conspire together, and that Allah knows all the unseen?
As for those who taunt the believers who give charity voluntarily, and scoff at those who give according to their means, Allah will scoff at them. Theirs shall be a painful punishment.
(It is the same) whether or not you beg forgiveness for them. If you beg forgiveness for them seventy times Allah will not forgive them, for they have disbelieved in Allah and His Messenger. Allah does not guide the evildoers.
Those who were left behind were glad that they were left behind by the Messenger of Allah, for they disliked to struggle in the Way of Allah with their wealth and their persons. They said: 'Do not go forth in the heat' Say: 'The Fire of Gehenna is more hot' Would that they understood!
They shall laugh but little and shed many tears. So shall they be recompensed for their earnings.
If Allah brings you back to a party of them and they ask permission to march with you, say: 'You shall never march with me, nor shall you fight with me against any enemy. You were pleased to remain on the first occasion, therefore, you shall now stay with those who remain behind'
You shall never pray over any one of them when he is dead, nor stand over his tomb. For they disbelieved in Allah and His Messenger and died whilst they were sinners.
Let neither their riches nor their children please you. With it Allah wants to punish them in this life, so that their souls depart while they disbelieve.
Whenever a chapter is sent down, saying: 'Believe in Allah and struggle with His Messenger' the rich among them asked you to excuse them, saying: 'Leave us with those who are to stay behind'
They were content to be with those who stayed behind, a seal was set upon their hearts, so they do not understand.
But the Messenger and those who believed with him struggled with their wealth and their selves For them awaits goodness and those are the winners.
Allah has prepared for them gardens underneath which rivers flow, in which they shall live for ever. That is the greatest winning.
Some Arabs of the desert who had an excuse came asking permission to stay behind; whilst those who belied Allah and His Messenger remained behind. A painful punishment shall fall on those of them that disbelieved.
There is no fault for the weak, the sick, and those lacking the means to spend (to stay behind), if they are true to Allah and His Messenger. There is no way against the righteous; Allah is Forgiving, the Most Merciful.
Nor shall those who came to you to be provided with mounts. And when you said: 'I can find no mounts for you' they turned back, their eyes streaming with tears grieving that they could not find the means to spend.
But the blame is to be laid on those who asked permission of you whilst they are rich. They are content to remain with those who stay behind. Allah has set a seal upon their hearts so they do not know.
When you return, they will apologize to you. Say: 'Make no excuses; we will not believe you. Allah has already told us of your news. Surely, Allah and His Messenger will see your work; then you will be returned to the Knower of the unseen and the visible, and He will inform you of what you were doing'
When you return to them, they will swear to you by Allah that you might turn aside from them. Let them alone, they are unclean. Gehenna shall be their refuge, a recompense for their earnings.
They will swear to you in order to please you. But if you will be pleased with them, Allah will not be pleased with the evildoing nation.
The Bedouin Arabs surpass (the city dwellers) in disbelief and hypocrisy, and are more likely not to know the bounds that Allah has sent down to His Messenger. But Allah is Knowing, Wise.
Some Arabs (Banu Asad and Ghatfan tribes) regard what they spend as a (compulsory) fine and wait for some misfortune to befall you. Theirs shall be the evil turn! Allah is Hearing, Knowing.
Yet there are some Arabs (Juhaina and Muszaina tribes) who believe in Allah and the Last Day, and regard what they spend as a means of bringing them close to Allah and to the prayers of the Messenger. Indeed, they are an offering for them; Allah will admit them to His Mercy. He is Forgiving, Merciful.
As for the first outstrippers among the migrants and supporters and those who followed them in doing good, Allah is pleased with them and they are pleased with Him. He has prepared for them gardens underneath which rivers flow, where they shall live for ever. That is the greatest winning.
Some of the Bedouin Arabs around you are hypocrites, and so are some of the people of Madinah who are well versed in hypocrisy. You do not know them, but We do. Twice We will punish them then they shall return to a mighty punishment.
There are others who have confessed their sins; they intermixed good deeds with another evil. It may be that Allah will turn towards them in mercy. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
Take charity from their wealth, in order that they are thereby cleansed and purified, and pray for them; for your prayer is a comforting mercy for them. Allah is Hearing, Knowing.
Do they not know that Allah accepts the repentance of His worshipers and takes their charity, and that Allah is the Forgiving, the Merciful?
Say: 'Allah will see your works and so will His Messenger and the believers; then you shall be returned to the Knower of the unseen and the visible, and He will inform you of what you were doing'
There are others who must wait for the Commandment of Allah. He will either punish or turn towards them. And Allah is Knowing, Wise.
And there are those who have taken a mosque to cause harm, disbelief, and to divide the believers, and as a place of ambush for those who fought Allah and His Messenger before. They swear: 'We desired nothing but good', but Allah bears witness that they are liars.
You shall never stand there. A mosque founded upon piety from the first day is worthier for you to stand in. In it are men who love to purify themselves. Allah loves those who purify themselves.
Is he who founds his building on the fear of Allah and His pleasure, better or he who founds his building on the brink of a crumbling edge so that it will tumble with him into the Fire of Gehenna? Allah does not guide the harmdoers.
The buildings they have built will always cause doubt in their hearts, unless their hearts are torn into pieces. Allah is Knowing, Wise.
Allah has purchased from the believers their selves and possessions, and for them is Paradise. They fight in the Way of Allah, slay, and are slain. That is a binding promise upon Him in the Torah, the Gospel and the Koran; and who is there that more truthfully fulfills his covenant than Allah? Therefore, rejoice in the bargain you have bargained with Him. That is the mighty winning.
Those who repent, those who worship Allah and praise (Him); those who journey, those who bow, those who prostrate themselves; those who order righteousness and forbid evil, and those who observe the limits of Allah give glad tidings to the believers.
It is not for the Prophet or the believers to ask forgiveness for idolaters, even though they are near kindred, after it has become clear that they are the inhabitants of Hell.
Abraham only asked for forgiveness for his father because of a promise he had made to him. But when it became clear to him that he was an enemy of Allah, he declared himself quit of him. Surely, Abraham was earnest in his supplication and tenderhearted.
Nor will Allah lead a nation astray after He has given them guidance until He has made clear to them all that they should guard against. Allah has knowledge of all things.
Indeed, to Allah belong the kingdom of the heavens and the earth; He gives life and causes death. Other than Allah, you have neither a guardian nor a helper.
In the hour of adversity, Allah turned (in mercy) to the Prophet, the Emigrants (of Mecca) and the Supporters (of Madinah) who followed him when some of their hearts were about to swerve away. He turned to them, indeed, He is Gentle, the Most Merciful.
And to the three who were left behind (at the Battle of Tabuk), until the earth became narrow with all its vastness, and their souls became narrow for them, they knew there was no shelter from Allah except in Him. Then He turned to them (in mercy) so that they might also turn (in repentance). Allah is the Turner, the Most Merciful.
Believers, fear Allah and stand with the truthful.
The people of Madinah and the Arabs who dwell around them have no cause to stay behind the Messenger of Allah, or to prefer their lives to his. They are neither stricken by thirst, nor by tiredness, nor yet by hunger in the Way of Allah, nor do they take steps that anger the unbelievers, nor gain any gain from an enemy, but that it is counted as a righteous deed. Allah does not waste the wage of the gooddoers.
Each sum they spend, be it small or large, and each valley they cross is written to their account, so that Allah may recompense them for their best deeds.
The believers should not go forth altogether, rather, a party from each section should go forth to become well versed in the religion, and when they return to their people warn them in order that they may beware.
Believers, fight the unbelievers who are near you. Let them find firmness in you. Know that Allah is with those who are cautious.
Whenever a chapter is sent down to you, some ask: 'Which of you has it increased in belief' It will surely increase the belief of the believers and they are joyful.
As for those whose hearts are diseased, they will be increased in filth added to their filth, so that they die as unbelievers.
Do they not see how once or twice every year they are tried? Yet still they neither repent nor remember.
Whenever a chapter is sent down, they glance at each other, (asking): 'Does anyone see you' Then they turn away. Allah has turned away their hearts, for they are a nation who do not understand.
Indeed, there has come to you a Messenger from your own, he grieves for your suffering, and is anxious about you, and is gentle, merciful to the believers.
Therefore, if they turn away, say: 'Allah is sufficient for me. There is no god except He. In Him I have put my trust. He is the Lord of the Mighty Throne'
