Ha Mim!
I swear by the Book that makes manifest (the truth).
Surely We revealed it on a blessed night surely We are ever warning--
Therein every wise affair is made distinct,
A command from Us; surely We are the senders (of apostles),
A mercy from your Lord, surely He is the Hearing, the Knowing,
The Lord of the heavens and the earth and what is between them, if you would be sure.
There is no god but He; He gives life and causes death, your Lord and the Lord of your fathers of yore.
Nay, they are in doubt, they sport.
Therefore keep waiting for the day when the heaven shall bring an evident smoke,
That shall overtake men; this is a painful punishment.
Our Lord! remove from us the punishment; surely we are believers.
How shall they be reminded, and there came to them an Apostle making clear (the truth),
Yet they turned their backs on him and said: One taught (by others), a madman.
Surely We will remove the punishment a little, (but) you will surely return (to evil).
On the day when We will seize (them) with the most violent seizing; surely We will inflict retribution.
And certainly We tried before them the people of Firon, and there came to them a noble apostle,
Saying: Deliver to me the servants of Allah, surely I am a faithful apostle to you,
And that do not exalt yourselves against Allah, surely I will bring to you a clear authority:
And surely I take refuge with my Lord and your Lord that you should stone me to death:
And if you do not believe in me, then leave me alone.
Then he called upon his Lord: These are a guilty people.
So go forth with My servants by night; surely you will be pursued:
And leave the sea intervening; surely they are a host that shall be drowned.
How many of the gardens and fountains have they left!
And cornfields and noble places!
And goodly things wherein they rejoiced;
Thus (it was), and We gave them as a heritage to another people.
So the heaven and the earth did not weep for them, nor were they respited.
And certainly We delivered the children of Israel from the abasing chastisement,
From Firon; surely he was haughty, (and) one of the extravagant.
And certainly We chose them, having knowledge, above the nations.
And We gave them of the communications wherein was clear blessing.
Most surely these do say:
There is naught but our first death and we shall not be raised again.
So bring our fathers (back), if you are truthful.
Are they better or the people of Tubba and those before them? We destroyed them, for surely they were guilty.
And We did not create the heavens and the earth and what is between them in sport.
We did not create them both but with the truth, but most of them do not know.
Surely the day of separation is their appointed term, of all of them
The day on which a friend shall not avail (his) friend aught, nor shall they be helped,
Save those on whom Allah shall have mercy; surely He is the Mighty the Merciful.
Surely the tree of the Zaqqum,
Is the food of the sinful
Like dregs of oil; it shall boil in (their) bellies,
Like the boiling of hot water.
Seize him, then drag him down into the middle of the hell;
Then pour above his head of the torment of the boiling water:
Taste; you forsooth are the mighty, the honorable:
Surely this is what you disputed about.
Surely those who guard (against evil) are in a secure place,
In gardens and springs;
They shall wear of fine and thick silk, (sitting) face to face;
Thus (shall it be), and We will wed them with Houris pure, beautiful ones.
They shall call therein for every fruit in security;
They shall not taste therein death except the first death, and He will save them from the punishment of the hell,
A grace from your Lord; this is the great achievement.
So have We made it easy in your tongue that they may be mindful.
Therefore wait; surely they are waiting.
