The hour drew nigh and the moon did rend asunder.
And if they see a miracle they turn aside and say: Transient magic.
And they call (it) a lie, and follow their low desires; and every affair has its appointed term.
And certainly some narratives have come to them wherein is prevention--
Consummate wisdom-- but warnings do not avail;
So turn (your) back on them (for) the day when the inviter shall invite them to a hard task,
Their eyes cast down, going forth from their graves as if they were scattered locusts,
Hastening to the inviter. The unbelievers shall say: This is a hard day.
Before them the people of Nuh rejected, so they rejected Our servant and called (him) mad, and he was driven away.
Therefore he called upon his Lord: I am overcome, come Thou then to help.
So We opened the gates of the cloud with water pouring
And We made water to flow forth in the land in springs, so the water gathered together according to a measure already ordained.
And We bore him on that which was made of planks and nails
Sailing, before Our eyes, a reward for him who was denied.
And certainly We left it as a sign, but is there anyone who
How (great) was then My punishment and My warning!
And certainly We have made the Quran easy for remembrance, but is there anyone who will mind?
Ad treated (the truth) as a lie, so how (great) was My punishment and My warning!
Surely We sent on them a tornado in a day of bitter ill-luck
Tearing men away as if they were the trunks of palm-trees torn up.
How (great) was then My punishment and My warning!
And certainly We have made the Quran easy for remembrance, but is there anyone who will mind?
Samood rejected the warning.
So they said: What! a single mortal from among us! Shall we follow him? Most surely we shall in that case be in sure error and distress:
Has the reminder been made to light upon him from among us? Nay! he is an insolent liar!
Tomorrow shall they know who is the liar, the insolent one.
Surely We are going to send the she-camel as a trial for them; therefore watch them and have patience.
And inform them that the water is shared between them; every share of the water shall be regulated.
But they called their companion, so he took (the sword) and slew (her).
How (great) was then My punishment and My warning!
Surely We sent upon them a single cry, so they were like the dry fragments of trees which the maker of an enclosure collects.
And certainly We have made the Quran easy for remembrance, but is there anyone who will mind?
The people of Lut treated the warning. as a lie.
Surely We sent upon them a stonestorm, except Lut's followers; We saved them a little before daybreak,
A favor from Us; thus do We reward him who gives thanks.
And certainly he warned them of Our violent seizure, but they obstinately disputed the warning.
And certainly they endeavored to turn him from his guests, but We blinded their eyes; so taste My chastisement and My warning.
And certainly a lasting chastisement overtook them in the morning.
So taste My chastisement and My warning.
And certainly We have made the Quran easy for remembrance, but is there anyone who will mind?
And certainly the warning came to Firon's people.
They rejected all Our communications, so We overtook them after the manner of a Mighty, Powerful One.
Are the unbelievers of yours better than these, or is there an exemption for you in the scriptures?
Or do they say: We are a host allied together to help each other?
Soon shall the hosts be routed, and they shall turn (their) backs.
Nay, the hour is their promised time, and the hour shall be most grievous and bitter.
Surely the guilty are in error and distress.
On the day when they shall be dragged upon their faces into the fire; taste the touch of hell.
Surely We have created everything according to a measure.
And Our command is but one, as the twinkling of an eye.
And certainly We have already destroyed the likes of you, but is there anyone who will mind?
And everything they have done is in the writings.
And everything small and great is written down.
Surely those who guard (against evil) shall be in gardens and rivers,
In the seat of honor with a most Powerful King.
