Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth declares the glory of Allah; to Him belongs the kingdom, and to Him is due (all) praise, and He has power over all things.
He it is Who created you, but one of you is an unbeliever and another of you is a believer; and Allah sees what you do.
He created the heavens and the earth with truth, and He formed you, then made goodly your forms, and to Him is the ultimate resort.
He knows what is in the heavens and the earth, and He knows what you hide and what you manifest; and Allah is Cognizant of what is in the hearts.
Has there not come to you the story of those who disbelieved before, then tasted the evil result of their conduct, and they had a painful punishment?
That is because there came to them their apostles with clear arguments, but they said: Shall mortals guide us? So they disbelieved and turned back, and Allah does not stand in need (of anything), and Allah is Self-sufficient, Praised.
Those who disbelieve think that they shall never be raised. Say: Aye! by my Lord! you shall most certainly be raised, then you shall most certainly be informed of what you did; and that is easy to Allah.
Therefore believe in Allah and His Apostle and the Light which We have revealed; and Allah is Aware of what you do.
On the day that He will gather you for the day of gathering, that is the day of loss and gain; and whoever believes in Allah and does good, He will remove from him his evil and cause him to enter gardens beneath which rivers flow, to abide therein forever; that is the great achievement.
And (as for) those who disbelieve and reject Our communications, they are the inmates of the fire, to abide therein and evil is the resort.
No affliction comes about but by Allah's permission; and whoever believes in Allah, He guides aright his heart; and Allah is Cognizant of all things.
And obey Allah and obey the Apostle, but if you turn back, then upon Our Apostle devolves only the clear delivery (of the message).
Allah, there is no god but He; and upon Allah, then, let the believers rely.
O you who believe! surely from among your wives and your children there is an enemy to you; therefore beware of them; and if you pardon and forbear and forgive, then surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
Your possessions and your children are only a trial, and Allah it is with Whom is a great reward.
Therefore be careful of (your duty to) Allah as much as you can, and hear and obey and spend, it is better for your souls; and whoever is saved from the greediness of his soul, these it is that are the successful.
If you set apart for Allah a goodly portion, He will double it for you and forgive you; and Allah is the Multiplier (of rewards), Forbearing,
The Knower of the unseen and the seen, the Mighty, the Wise.
