I swear by the emissary winds, sent one after another (for men's benefit),
By the raging hurricanes,
Which scatter clouds to their destined places,
Then separate them one from another,
Then I swear by the angels who bring down the revelation,
To clear or to warn.
Most surely what you are threatened with must come to pass.
So when the stars are made to lose their light,
And when the heaven is rent asunder,
And when the mountains are carried away as dust,
And when the apostles are gathered at their appointed time
To what day is the doom fixed?
To the day of decision.
And what will make you comprehend what the day of decision is?
Woe on that day to the rejecters.
Did We not destroy the former generations?
Then did We follow them up with later ones.
Even thus shall We deal with the guilty.
Woe on that day to the rejecters.
Did We not create you from contemptible water?
Then We placed it in a secure resting-place,
Till an appointed term,
So We proportion it-- how well are We at proportioning (things).
Woe on that day to the rejecters.
Have We not made the earth to draw together to itself,
The living and the dead,
And made therein lofty mountains, and given you to drink of sweet water?
Woe on that day to the rejecters.
Walk on to that which you called a lie.
Walk on to the covering having three branches,
Neither having the coolness of the shade nor availing against the flame.
Surely it sends up sparks like palaces,
As if they were tawny camels.
Woe on that day to the rejecters.
This is the day on which they shall not speak,
And permission shall not be given to them so that they should offer excuses.
Woe on that day to the rejecters.
This is the day of decision: We have gathered you and those of yore.
So if you have a plan, plan against Me (now).
Woe on that day to the rejecters.
Surely those who guard (against evil) shall be amid shades and fountains,
And fruits such as they desire.
Eat and drink pleasantly because of what you did.
Surely thus do We reward the doers of good.
Woe on that day to the rejecters.
Eat and enjoy yourselves for a little; surely you are guilty.
Woe on that day to the rejecters.
And where it is said to them: Bow down, they do not bow down.
Woe on that day to the rejecters.
In what announcement, then, after it, will they believe?
