Of what do they ask one another?
About the great event,
About which they differ?
Nay! they shall soon come to know
Nay! Nay! they shall soon know.
Have We not made the earth an even expanse?
And the mountains as projections (thereon)?
And We created you in pairs,
And We made your sleep to be rest (to you),
And We made the night to be a covering,
And We made the day for seeking livelihood.
And We made above you seven strong ones,
And We made a shining lamp,
And We send down from the clouds water pouring forth abundantly,
That We may bring forth thereby corn and herbs,
And gardens dense and luxuriant.
Surely the day of decision is (a day) appointed:
The day on which the trumpet shall be blown so you shall come forth in hosts,
And the heaven shall be opened so that it shall be all openings,
And the mountains shall be moved off so that they shall remain a mere semblance.
Surely hell lies in wait,
A place of resort for the inordinate,
Living therein for ages.
They shall not taste therein cool nor drink
But boiling and intensely cold water,
Requital corresponding.
Surely they feared not the account,
And called Our communications a lie, giving the lie (to the truth).
And We have recorded everything in a book,
So taste! for We will not add to you aught but chastisement.
Surely for those who guard (against evil) is achievement,
Gardens and vineyards,
And voluptuous women of equal age;
And a pure cup.
They shall not hear therein any vain words nor lying.
A reward from your Lord, a gift according to a reckoning:
The Lord of the heavens and the earth and what is between them, the Beneficent Allah, they shall not be able to address Him.
The day on which the spirit and the angels shall stand in ranks; they shall not speak except he whom the Beneficent Allah permits and who speaks the right thing.
That is the sure day, so whoever desires may take refuge with his Lord.
Surely We have warned you of a chastisement near at hand: the day when man shall see what his two hands have sent before, and the unbeliever shall say: O! would that I were dust!
