Alif. Lam. Mim
The revelation of the Scripture whereof there is no doubt is from the Lord of the Worlds.
Or say they: He hath invented it? Nay, but it is the Truth from thy Lord, that thou mayst warn a folk to whom no warner came before thee, that haply they may walk aright.
Allah it is Who created the heavens and the earth, and that which is between them, in six Days. Then He mounted the Throne. Ye have not, beside Him, a protecting friend or mediator. Will ye not then remember?
He directeth the ordinance from the heaven unto the earth; then it ascendeth unto Him in a Day, whereof the measure is a thousand years of that ye reckon.
Such is the Knower of the Invisible and the Visible, the Mighty, the Merciful,
Who made all things good which He created, and He began the creation of man from clay;
Then He made his seed from a draught of despised fluid;
Then He fashioned him and breathed into him of His Spirit; and appointed for you hearing and sight and hearts. Small thanks give ye!
And they say: When we are lost in the earth, how can we then be re-created? Nay but they are disbelievers in the meeting with their Lord.
Say: The angel of death, who hath charge concerning you, will gather you, and afterward unto your Lord ye will be returned.
Couldst thou but see when the guilty hang their heads before their Lord, (and say): Our Lord! We have now seen and heard, so send us back; we will do right, now we are sure.
And if We had so willed, We could have given every soul its guidance, but the word from Me concerning evildoers took effect: that I will fill hell with the jinn and mankind together.
So taste (the evil of your deeds). Forasmuch as ye forgot the meeting of this your day, lo! We forget you. Taste the doom of immortality because of what ye used to do.
Only those believe in Our revelations who, when they are reminded of them, fall down prostrate and hymn the praise of their Lord, and they are not scornful,
Who forsake their beds to cry unto their Lord in fear and hope, and spend of that We have bestowed on them.
No soul knoweth what is kept hid for them of joy, as a reward for what they used to do.
Is he who is a believer like unto him who is an evil-liver? They are not alike.
But as for those who believe and do good works, for them are the Gardens of Retreat - a welcome (in reward) for what they used to do.
And as for those who do evil, their retreat is the Fire. Whenever they desire to issue forth from thence, they are brought back thither. Unto them it is said: Taste the torment of the Fire which ye used to deny.
And verily We make them taste the lower punishment before the greater, that haply they may return.
And who doth greater wrong than he who is reminded of the revelations of his Lord, then turneth from them. Lo! We shall requite the guilty.
We verily gave Moses the Scripture; so be not ye in doubt of his receiving it; and We appointed it a guidance for the Children of Israel.
And when they became steadfast and believed firmly in Our revelations, We appointed from among them leaders who guided by Our command.
Lo! thy Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection concerning that wherein they used to differ.
Is it not a guidance for them (to observe) how many generations We destroyed before them, amid whose dwelling places they do walk? Lo! therein verily are portents! Will they not then heed?
Have they not seen how We lead the water to the barren land and therewith bring forth crops whereof their cattle eat, and they themselves? Will they not then see?
And they say: When cometh this victory (of yours) if ye are truthful?
Say (unto them): On the day of the victory the faith of those who disbelieve (and who then will believe) will not avail them, neither will they be reprieved.
So withdraw from them (O Muhammad), and await (the event). Lo! they (also) are awaiting (it).
