By those who set the ranks in battle order
And those who drive away (the wicked) with reproof
And those who read (the Word) for a reminder,
Lo! thy Lord is surely One;
Lord of the heavens and of the earth and all that is between them, and Lord of the sun's risings.
Lo! We have adorned the lowest heaven with an ornament, the planets;
With security from every froward devil.
They cannot listen to the Highest Chiefs for they are pelted from every side,
Outcast, and theirs is a perpetual torment;
Save him who snatcheth a fragment, and there pursueth him a piercing flame.
Then ask them (O Muhammad): Are they stronger as a creation, or those (others) whom we have created? Lo! We created them of plastic clay.
Nay, but thou dost marvel when they mock
And heed not when they are reminded,
And seek to scoff when they behold a portent.
And they say: Lo! this is mere magic;
When we are dead and have become dust and bones, shall we then, forsooth, be raised (again)?
And our forefathers?
Say (O Muhammad): Ye, in truth; and ye will be brought low.
There is but one Shout, and lo! they behold,
And say: Ah, woe for us! This is the Day of Judgment.
This is the Day of Separation, which ye used to deny.
(And it is said unto the angels): Assemble those who did wrong, together with their wives and what they used to worship
Instead of Allah, and lead them to the path to hell;
And stop them, for they must be questioned.
What aileth you that ye help not one another?
Nay, but this day they make full submission.
And some of them draw near unto others, mutually questioning.
They say: Lo! ye used to come unto us, imposing, (swearing that ye spoke the truth).
They answer: Nay, but ye (yourselves) were not believers.
We had no power over you, but ye were wayward folk.
Now the Word of our Lord hath been fulfilled concerning us. Lo! we are about to taste (the doom).
Thus we misled you. Lo! we were (ourselves) astray.
Then lo! this day they (both) are sharers in the doom.
Lo! thus deal We with the guilty.
For when it was said unto them, There is no Allah save Allah, they were scornful
And said: Shall we forsake our gods for a mad poet?
Nay, but he brought the Truth, and he confirmed those sent (before him).
Lo! (now) verily ye taste the painful doom -
Ye are requited naught save what ye did -
Save single-minded slaves of Allah;
For them there is a known provision,
Fruits. And they will be honoured
In the Gardens of delight,
On couches facing one another;
A cup from a gushing spring is brought round for them,
White, delicious to the drinkers,
Wherein there is no headache nor are they made mad thereby.
And with them are those of modest gaze, with lovely eyes,
(Pure) as they were hidden eggs (of the ostrich).
And some of them draw near unto others, mutually questioning.
A speaker of them saith: Lo! I had a comrade
Who used to say: Art thou in truth of those who put faith (in his words)?
Can we, when we are dead and have become mere dust and bones - can we (then) verily be brought to book?
He saith: Will ye look?
Then looketh he and seeth him in the depth of hell.
He saith: By Allah, thou verily didst all but cause my ruin,
And had it not been for the favour of my Lord, I too had been of those haled forth (to doom).
Are we then not to die
Saving our former death, and are we not to be punished?
Lo! this is the supreme triumph.
For the like of this, then, let the workers work.
Is this better as a welcome, or the tree of Zaqqum?
Lo! We have appointed it a torment for wrong-doers.
Lo! it is a tree that springeth in the heart of hell.
Its crop is as it were the heads of devils
And lo! they verily must eat thereof, and fill (their) bellies therewith.
And afterward, lo! thereupon they have a drink of boiling water
And afterward, lo! their return is surely unto hell.
They indeed found their fathers astray,
But they make haste (to follow) in their footsteps.
And verily most of the men of old went astray before them,
And verily We sent among them warners.
Then see the nature of the consequence for those warned,
Save single-minded slaves of Allah.
And Noah verily prayed unto Us, and gracious was the Hearer of his prayer
And We saved him and his household from the great distress,
And made his seed the survivors,
And left for him among the later folk (the salutation):
Peace be unto Noah among the peoples!
Lo! thus do We reward the good.
Lo! he is one of Our believing slaves.
Then We did drown the others.
And lo! of his persuasion verily was Abraham
When he came unto his Lord with a whole heart;
When he said unto his father and his folk: What is it that ye worship?
Is it a falsehood - gods beside Allah - that ye desire?
What then is your opinion of the Lord of the Worlds?
And he glanced a glance at the stars
Then said: Lo! I feel sick!
And they turned their backs and went away from him.
Then turned he to their gods and said: Will ye not eat?
What aileth you that ye speak not?
Then he attacked them, striking with his right hand.
And (his people) came toward him, hastening.
He said: Worship ye that which ye yourselves do carve
When Allah hath created you and what ye make?
They said: Build for him a building and fling him in the red-hotfire.
And they designed a snare for him, but We made them the undermost.
And he said: Lo! I am going unto my Lord Who will guide me.
My Lord! Vouchsafe me of the righteous.
So We gave him tidings of a gentle son.
And when (his son) was old enough to walk with him, (Abraham) said: O my dear son, I have seen in a dream that I must sacrifice thee. So look, what thinkest thou? He said: O my father! Do that which thou art commanded. Allah willing, thou shalt find me of the steadfast.
Then, when they had both surrendered (to Allah), and he had flung him down upon his face,
We called unto him: O Abraham!
Thou hast already fulfilled the vision. Lo! thus do We reward the good.
Lo! that verily was a clear test.
Then We ransomed him with a tremendous victim.
And We left for him among the later folk (the salutation):
Peace be unto Abraham!
Thus do We reward the good.
Lo! he is one of Our believing slaves.
And we gave him tidings of the birth of Isaac, a prophet of the righteous.
And We blessed him and Isaac. And of their seed are some who do good, and some who plainly wrong themselves.
And We verily gave grace unto Moses and Aaron,
And saved them and their people from the great distress,
And helped them so that they became the victors.
And We gave them the clear Scripture
And showed them the right path.
And We left for them among the later folk (the salutation):
Peace be unto Moses and Aaron!
Lo! thus do We reward the good.
Lo! they are two of Our believing slaves.
And lo! Elias was of those sent (to warn),
When he said unto his folk: Will ye not ward off (evil)?
Will ye cry unto Baal and forsake the Best of creators,
Allah, your Lord and Lord of your forefathers?
But they denied him, so they surely will be haled forth (to the doom)
Save single-minded slaves of Allah.
And we left for him among the later folk (the salutation):
Peace be unto Elias!
Lo! thus do We reward the good.
Lo! he is one of our believing slaves.
And lo! Lot verily was of those sent (to warn).
When We saved him and his household, every one,
Save an old woman among those who stayed behind;
Then We destroyed the others.
And lo! ye verily pass by (the ruin of) them in the morning
And at night-time; have ye then no sense?
And lo! Jonah verily was of those sent (to warn)
When he fled unto the laden ship,
And then drew lots and was of those rejected;
And the fish swallowed him while he was blameworthy;
And had he not been one of those who glorify (Allah)
He would have tarried in its belly till the day when they are raised;
Then We cast him on a desert shore while he was sick;
And We caused a tree of gourd to grow above him;
And We sent him to a hundred thousand (folk) or more
And they believed, therefor We gave them comfort for a while.
Now ask them (O Muhammad): Hath thy Lord daughters whereas they have sons?
Or created We the angels females while they were present?
Lo! it is of their falsehood that they say:
Allah hath begotten. Allah! verily they tell a lie.
(And again of their falsehood): He hath preferred daughters to sons.
What aileth you? How judge ye?
Will ye not then reflect?
Or have ye a clear warrant?
Then produce your writ, if ye are truthful.
And they imagine kinship between him and the jinn, whereas the jinn know well that they will be brought before (Him).
Glorified be Allah from that which they attribute (unto Him),
Save single-minded slaves of Allah.
Lo! verily, ye and that which ye worship,
Ye cannot excite (anyone) against Him.
Save him who is to burn in hell.
There is not one of us but hath his known position.
Lo! we, even we are they who set the ranks,
Lo! we, even we are they who hymn His praise
And indeed they used to say:
If we had but a reminder from the men of old
We would be single-minded slaves of Allah.
Yet (now that it is come) they disbelieve therein; but they will come to know.
And verily Our word went forth of old unto Our bondmen sent (to warn)
That they verily would be helped,
And that Our host, they verily would be the victors.
So withdraw from them (O Muhammad) awhile,
And watch, for they will (soon) see.
Would they hasten on Our doom?
But when it cometh home to them, then it will be a hapless morn for those who have been warned.
Withdraw from them awhile
And watch, for they will (soon) see.
Glorified be thy Lord, the Lord of Majesty, from that which they attribute (unto Him)
And peace be unto those sent (to warn).
And praise be to Allah, Lord of the Worlds!
