Ha. Mim.
By the Scripture that maketh plain
Lo! We revealed it on a blessed night - Lo! We are ever warning -
Whereon every wise command is made clear
As a command from Our presence - Lo! We are ever sending -
A mercy from thy Lord. Lo! He, even He is the Hearer, the Knower,
Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, if ye would be sure.
There is no Allah save Him. He quickeneth and giveth death; your Lord and Lord of your forefathers.
Nay, but they play in doubt.
But watch thou (O Muhammad) for the day when the sky will produce visible smoke
That will envelop the people. This will be a painful torment.
(Then they will say): Our Lord relieve us of the torment. Lo! we are believers.
How can there be remembrance for them, when a messenger making plain (the Truth) had already come unto them,
And they had turned away from him and said: One taught (by others), a madman?
Lo! We withdraw the torment a little. Lo! ye return (to disbelief).
On the day when We shall seize them with the greater seizure, (then) in truth We shall punish.
And verily We tried before them Pharaoh's folk, when there came unto them a noble messenger,
Saying: Give up to me the slaves of Allah. Lo! I am a faithful messenger unto you.
And saying: Be not proud against Allah. Lo! I bring you a clear warrant.
And lo! I have sought refuge in my Lord and your Lord lest ye stone me to death.
And if ye put no faith in me, then let me go.
And he cried unto his Lord, (saying): These are guilty folk.
Then (his Lord commanded): Take away My slaves by night. Lo! ye will be followed,
And leave the sea behind at rest, for lo! they are a drowned host.
How many were the gardens and the watersprings that they left behind,
And the cornlands and the goodly sites
And pleasant things wherein they took delight!
Even so (it was), and We made it an inheritance for other folk;
And the heaven and the earth wept not for them, nor were they reprieved.
And We delivered the Children of Israel from the shameful doom;
(We delivered them) from Pharaoh. Lo! he was a tyrant of the wanton ones.
And We chose them, purposely, above (all) creatures.
And We gave them portents wherein was a clear trial.
Lo! these, forsooth, are saying:
There is naught but our first death, and we shall not be raised again.
Bring back our fathers, if ye speak the truth!
Are they better, or the folk of Tubb'a and those before them? We destroyed them, for surely they were guilty.
And We created not the heavens and the earth, and all that is between them, in play.
We created them not save with truth; but most of them know not.
Assuredly the Day of Decision is the term for all of them,
A day when friend can in naught avail friend, nor can they be helped,
Save him on whom Allah hath mercy. Lo! He is the Mighty, the Merciful.
Lo! the tree of Zaqqum,
The food of the sinner!
Like molten brass, it seetheth in their bellies
As the seething of boiling water.
(And it will be said): Take him and drag him to the midst of hell,
Then pour upon his head the torment of boiling water.
(Saying): Taste! Lo! thou wast forsooth the mighty, the noble!
Lo! this is that whereof ye used to doubt.
Lo! those who kept their duty will be in a place secured.
Amid gardens and watersprings,
Attired in silk and silk embroidery, facing one another.
Even so (it will be). And We shall wed them unto fair ones with wide, lovely eyes.
They call therein for every fruit in safety.
They taste not death therein, save the first death. And He hath saved them from the doom of hell,
A bounty from thy Lord. That is the supreme triumph.
And We have made (this Scripture) easy in thy language only that they may heed.
Wait then (O Muhammad). Lo! they (too) are waiting.
