Qaf. By the Glorious Qur'an,
Nay, but they marvel that a warner of their own hath come unto them; and the disbelievers say: This is a strange thing:
When we are dead and have become dust (shall we be brought back again)? That would be a far return!
We know that which the earth taketh of them, and with Us is a recording Book.
Nay, but they have denied the truth when it came unto them, therefor they are now in troubled case.
Have they not then observed the sky above them, how We have constructed it and beautified it, and how there are no rifts therein?
And the earth have We spread out, and have flung firm hills therein, and have caused of every lovely kind to grow thereon,
A vision and a reminder for every penitent slave.
And We send down from the sky blessed water whereby We give growth unto gardens and the grain of crops,
And lofty date-palms with ranged clusters,
Provision (made) for men; and therewith We quicken a dead land. Even so will be the resurrection of the dead.
The folk of Noah denied (the truth) before them, and (so did) the dwellers at Ar-Rass and (the tribe of) Thamud,
And (the tribe of) A'ad, and Pharaoh, and the brethren of Lot,
And the dwellers in the wood, and the folk of Tubb'a: every one denied their messengers, therefor My threat took effect.
Were We then worn out by the first creation? Yet they are in doubt about a new creation.
We verily created man and We know what his soul whispereth to him, and We are nearer to him than his jugular vein.
When the two Receivers receive (him), seated on the right hand and on the left,
He uttereth no word but there is with him an observer ready.
And the agony of death cometh in truth. (And it is said unto him): This is that which thou wast wont to shun.
And the trumpet is blown. This is the threatened Day.
And every soul cometh, along with it a driver and a witness.
(And unto the evil-doer it is said): Thou wast in heedlessness of this. Now We have removed from thee thy covering, and piercing is thy sight this day.
And (unto the evil-doer) his comrade saith: This is that which I have ready (as testimony).
(And it is said): Do ye twain hurl to hell each rebel ingrate,
Hinderer of good, transgressor, doubter,
Who setteth up another god along with Allah. Do ye twain hurl him to the dreadful doom.
His comrade saith: Our Lord! I did not cause him to rebel, but he was (himself) far gone in error.
He saith: Contend not in My presence, when I had already proffered unto you the warning.
The sentence that cometh from Me cannot be changed, and I am in no wise a tyrant unto the slaves.
On the day when We say unto hell: Art thou filled? and it saith: Can there be more to come?
And the Garden is brought nigh for those who kept from evil, no longer distant.
(And it is said): This is that which ye were promised. (It is) for every penitent and heedful one,
Who feareth the Beneficent in secret and cometh with a contrite heart.
Enter it in peace. This is the day of immortality.
There they have all that they desire, and there is more with Us.
And how many a generation We destroyed before them, who were mightier than these in prowess so that they overran the lands! Had they any place of refuge (when the judgment came)?
Lo! therein verily is a reminder for him who hath a heart, or giveth ear with full intelligence.
And verily We created the heavens and the earth, and all that is between them, in six Days, and naught of weariness touched Us.
Therefor (O Muhammad) bear with what they say, and hymn the praise of thy Lord before the rising and before the setting of the sun;
And in the night-time hymn His praise, and after the (prescribed) prostrations.
And listen on the day when the crier crieth from a near place,
The day when they will hear the (Awful) Cry in truth. That is the day of coming forth (from the graves).
Lo! We it is Who quicken and give death, and unto Us is the journeying.
On the day when the earth splitteth asunder from them, hastening forth (they come). That is a gathering easy for Us (to make).
We are Best Aware of what they say, and thou (O Muhammad) art in no wise a compeller over them. But warn by the Qur'an him who feareth My threat.
