Blessed is He in Whose hand is the Sovereignty, and, He is Able to do all things.
Who hath created life and death that He may try you which of you is best in conduct; and He is the Mighty, the Forgiving,
Who hath created seven heavens in harmony. Thou (Muhammad) canst see no fault in the Beneficent One's creation; then look again: Canst thou see any rifts?
Then look again and yet again, thy sight will return unto thee weakened and made dim.
And verily We have beautified the world's heaven with lamps, and We have made them missiles for the devils, and for them We have prepared the doom of flame.
And for those who disbelieve in their Lord there is the doom of hell, a hapless journey's end!
When they are flung therein they hear its roaring as it boileth up,
As it would burst with rage. Whenever a (fresh) host is flung therein the wardens thereof ask them: Came there unto you no warner?
They say: Yea, verily, a warner came unto us; but we denied and said: Allah hath naught revealed; ye are in naught but a great error.
And they say: Had we been wont to listen or have sense, we had not been among the dwellers in the flames.
So they acknowledge their sins; but far removed (from mercy) are the dwellers in the flames.
Lo! those who fear their Lord in secret, theirs will be forgiveness and a great reward.
And keep your opinion secret or proclaim it, lo! He is Knower of all that is in the breasts (of men).
Should He not know what He created? And He is the Subtile, the Aware.
He it is Who hath made the earth subservient unto you, so Walk in the paths thereof and eat of His providence. And unto Him will be the resurrection (of the dead).
Have ye taken security from Him Who is in the heaven that He will not cause the earth to swallow you when lo! it is convulsed?
Or have ye taken security from Him Who is in the heaven that He will not let loose on you a hurricane? But ye shall know the manner of My warning.
And verily those before them denied, then (see) the manner of My wrath (with them)!
Have they not seen the birds above them spreading out their wings and closing them? Naught upholdeth them save the Beneficent. Lo! He is Seer of all things.
Or who is he that will be an army unto you to help you instead of the Beneficent? The disbelievers are in naught but illusion.
Or who is he that will provide for you if He should withhold His providence? Nay, but they are set in pride and frowardness.
Is he who goeth groping on his face more rightly guided, or he who walketh upright on a straight road?
Say (unto them, O Muhammad): He it is who gave you being, and hath assigned unto you ears and eyes and hearts. Small thanks give ye!
Say: He it is Who multiplieth you in the earth, and unto Whom ye will be gathered.
And they say: When (will) this promise (be fulfilled), if ye are truthful?
Say: The knowledge is with Allah only, and I am but a plain warner;
But when they see it nigh, the faces of those who disbelieve will be awry, and it will be said (unto them): This is that for which ye used to call.
Say (O Muhammad): Have ye thought: Whether Allah causeth me (Muhammad) and those with me to perish or hath mercy on us, still, who will protect the disbelievers from a painful doom?
Say: He is the Beneficent. In Him we believe and in Him we put our trust. And ye will soon know who it is that is in error manifest.
Say: Have ye thought: If (all) your water were to disappear into the earth, who then could bring you gushing water?
