Hath there come upon man (ever) any period of time in which he was a thing unremembered?
Lo! We create man from a drop of thickened fluid to test him; so We make him hearing, knowing.
Lo! We have shown him the way, whether he be grateful or disbelieving.
Lo! We have prepared for disbelievers manacles and carcans and a raging fire.
Lo! the righteous shall drink of a cup whereof the mixture is of Kafur,
A spring wherefrom the slaves of Allah drink, making it gush forth abundantly,
(Because) they perform the vow and fear a day whereof the evil is wide-spreading,
And feed with food the needy wretch, the orphan and the prisoner, for love of Him,
(Saying): We feed you, for the sake of Allah only. We wish for no reward nor thanks from you;
Lo! we fear from our Lord a day of frowning and of fate.
Therefor Allah hath warded off from them the evil of that day, and hath made them find brightness and joy;
And hath awarded them for all that they endured, a Garden and silk attire;
Reclining therein upon couches, they will find there neither (heat of) a sun nor bitter cold.
The shade thereof is close upon them and the clustered fruits thereof bow down.
Goblets of silver are brought round for them, and beakers (as) of glass
(Bright as) glass but (made) of silver, which they (themselves) have measured to the measure (of their deeds).
There are they watered with a cup whereof the mixture is of Zanjabil,
(The water of) a spring therein, named Salsabil.
There wait on them immortal youths, whom, when thou seest, thou wouldst take for scattered pearls.
When thou seest, thou wilt see there bliss and high estate.
Their raiment will be fine green silk and gold embroidery. Bracelets of silver will they wear. Their Lord will slake their thirst with a pure drink.
(And it will be said unto them): Lo! this is a reward for you. Your endeavour (upon earth) hath found acceptance.
Lo! We, even We, have revealed unto thee the Qur'an, a revelation;
So submit patiently to thy Lord's command, and obey not of them any guilty one or disbeliever.
Remember the name of thy Lord at morn and evening.
And worship Him (a portion) of the night. And glorify Him through the livelong night.
Lo! these love fleeting life, and put behind them (the remembrance of) a grievous day.
We, even We, created them, and strengthened their frame. And when We will, We can replace them, bringing others like them in their stead.
Lo! this is an Admonishment, that whosoever will may choose a way unto his Lord.
Yet ye will not, unless Allah willeth. Lo! Allah is Knower, Wise.
He maketh whom He will to enter His mercy, and for evil-doers hath prepared a painful doom.
