By the emissary winds, (sent) one after another
By the raging hurricanes,
By those which cause earth's vegetation to revive;
By those who winnow with a winnowing,
By those who bring down the Reminder,
To excuse or to warn,
Surely that which ye are promised will befall.
So when the stars are put out,
And when the sky is riven asunder,
And when the mountains are blown away,
And when the messengers are brought unto their time appointed -
For what day is the time appointed?
For the Day of Decision.
And what will convey unto thee what the Day of Decision is! -
Woe unto the repudiators on that day!
Destroyed We not the former folk,
Then caused the latter folk to follow after?
Thus deal We ever with the guilty.
Woe unto the repudiators on that day!
Did We not create you from a base fluid
Which We laid up in a safe abode
For a known term?
Thus We arranged. How excellent is Our arranging!
Woe unto the repudiators on that day!
Have We not made the earth a receptacle
Both for the living and the dead,
And placed therein high mountains and given you to drink sweet water therein?
Woe unto the repudiators on that day!
(It will be said unto them:) Depart unto that (doom) which ye used to deny;
Depart unto the shadow falling threefold,
(Which yet is) no relief nor shelter from the flame.
Lo! it throweth up sparks like the castles,
(Or) as it might be camels of bright yellow hue.
Woe unto the repudiators on that day!
This is a day wherein they speak not,
Nor are they suffered to put forth excuses.
Woe unto the repudiators on that day!
This is the Day of Decision, We have brought you and the men of old together.
If now ye have any wit, outwit Me.
Woe unto the repudiators on that day!
Lo! those who kept their duty are amid shade and fountains,
And fruits such as they desire.
(Unto them it is said:) Eat, drink and welcome, O ye blessed, in return for what ye did.
Thus do We reward the good.
Woe unto the repudiators on that day!
Eat and take your ease (on earth) a little. Lo! ye are guilty.
Woe unto the repudiators on that day!
When it is said unto them: Bow down, they bow not down!
Woe unto the repudiators on that day!
In what statement, after this, will they believe?
