There hath approached unto mankind their reckoning, while they in neglect are turning away.
There cometh not unto them a fresh admonition from their Lord but they listen to it while they are playing.
In sport being their hearts. And those who do wrong keep secret their private discourse this is but a human being like unto yourselves; will ye then betake yourselves to magic while ye know?
The Prophet said: my Lord knoweth the word in the heavens and the earth, and He is the Hearer, the Knower.
Aye! they say: a medley of dreams; aye! he hath fabricated it; aye! he is a poet; so let him bring us a sign even as the ancients were sent with.
Not a city before them which We destroyed believed; will they then believe?
And We sent not before thee but men unto whom We revealed; so ask the people of the Admonition if ye know not.
And We made them not bodies not eating food; nor were they to be abiders.
Then We made good unto them the premise; so We delivered them and those whom We willed, and We destroyed the extravagant.
And assuredly We have sent down unto you a Book wherein is admonition for you; will ye not then reflect?
And how many a city have We overthrown which were doing wrong, and We caused to grow up thereafter anot her nation!
Then when they perceived Our violence, lo! they were from it fleeing.
Flee not, and return unto that wherein ye luxuriated and your habitations, haply ye will be questioned.
They said: woe unto us! verily we have been wrong-doers.
And this ceased not to be their cry until We made them a harvestreaped, extinguished.
And We created not the heaven and the earth and that which is in between in play.
Had We intended that We should choose a sport, surely We would choose it from before Us--if We were ever going to do that.
Aye! We hurl truth against false hood, so that it braineth it, and lo! it vanisheth; and to you be the woe for that which ye utter!
And His is whosoever is in the heavens and the earth; and those nigh unto Him are not too stiff-necked for His worship nor are they weary.
And they hallow Him night and day, and they flag not.
Have they taken gods from the earth who raise the deed?
Had there been in between the twain gods except Allah surely the twain would have gone to ruin. Hallowed be Allah, the Lord of the Throne, from that which they utter!
He shall be questioned not as to that which He doth, while they shall be questioned.
Have they taken gods beside Him? Say thou: forth with your proof This is an admonition unto those with me and an admonition unto those before me. But most of them knew not the truth, and so they are averters.
And We sent not before thee an apostle but We revealed unto him that there is no god but I, so worship Me.
And they say; the Compaionate hath taken a son. Hallowed be He! aye! they are bondmen honoured.
They precede Him not in words, and by His command they work.
He knoweth whatsoever is before them and whatsoever is behind them; and they intercede not except for him whom He approveth, and in awe of Him they are fearful.
And whosoever of them should say: verily I am a god beside Him, such a one We shall requite with Hell; Thus We requite the wrong- doers.
Have not these who disbelieve considered that the heavens and the earth were closed up, then We rent them? And We have made of water everything living; will they not then believe?
And We have placed in the earth firm mountains lest it should move away with them, and We placed therein Passages for paths, that haply they may be guided.
And We have made the heaven a roof, safe, and from the signs there of they are averters.
And He it is Who hath created the night and the day, and the sun and the moon, each in an orb floating.
And We appointed not for any human being before thee immortality; if thou then diest, are they to be immortals?
Every soul is going to taste of death, and We shall prove you with evil and good as a temptation; and unto Us ye shall be returned.
And when those who disbelieve behold thee they only take thee up for mockery: is this he who mentioneth your gods? while in the mention of the compassionate they are themselves blasphemers.
Man was created of hast, surely I shall show you MY signs, so ask Me not to hasten.
And they say: when cometh this torment if ye are truth- tellers!
If only those who disbelieve have known of the time when they shall not be able to ward off from their faces the Fire nor from their backs, nor shall they be succoured!
Aye! it would come upon them on a sudden and shall dumbfound them; they shall not be able to avert it, nor shall they be respited.
And assuredly mocked were the apostles before thee, then there surrounded those of them Who scoffed that whereat they had been mocking!
Say thou: who guardeth you by night and by day from the Compassionate! O Yet from the remembrance of their Lord they avert themselves!
Have they gods who defend them beside Us? They are not able to succour themselves, and against Us they cannot be kept company with.
Aye! We let these people and their fathers enjoy until there grew long upon them the life. Behold they not that We come unto the land diminishing it by the borders thereof? Shall they then be the victors?
Say thou: I only warn you by the revelation; and the deaf hearken not unto the call when they are warned.
And if a breath of the torment of thy Lord were to touch them, they will say: woe unto us! we have been wrong-doers.
And We shall set balances of justice for the Day of Judgment; then no soul shall be wronged at all; and if it be but the weight of a grain of mustard-seed We shall bring it; and We suffice as Reckoners.
And assuredly We vcuchsafed unto Musa and Harun the distinction and illumination and an admonition for the God-fearing.
These who fear their Lord unseen, and who are of the Hour fearful.
And this is an admonition blest, which We have sent down! will ye then be the rejectors thereof?
And assuredly We vouchsafed un to lbrahim his rectitude aforetime, and him We had ever known.
Recall what time he said unto his father and his people what are these images to which ye are cleaving?
They said: we found our fathers the worshippers thereof.
He said: assuredlY ye, ye and your fathers, have been in error manifest.
They said: hast thou come unto us with the truth, or art thou of those who sport?
He said: Aye! your Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth Who created them, and as to that I am of the witnesses.
And by Allah I shall surely devise a plot against your idols after ye turned away backward.
Then he made them fragments, all except the big one of them, that haply unto it they may return.
They said: who hath wrought this to our gods? verily he is of the wrong-doers.
They said: We heard a youth speak of them, who is called Ibrahim.
They said: bring him then before the eyes of the people, haply they may bear witness.
They said: art thou the one who hath wrought this unto our gods, O Ibrahim?
He said: rather he hath wrought it: this big one of them: so question them, if they ever speak.
They then turned to themselves, and said: verily ye it is who are the wrong-doers.
Thereafter they were made to turn over upon their heads, saying, assuredly thou knowest that they speak not.
He said: worship ye, then, beside Allah, that which profiteth you not at all, nor it hurteth you
Fie upon you and upon that which ye worship beside Allah! Will ye not then reflect?
They said: burn him, and succour your gods, if ye will be doing.
We said: O fire! be thou cool and peace unto Ibrahim
And they intended to do him an evil, but We made them the worst losers.
And We delivered him and Lut to the land wherein We had placed Our blessings for the worlds.
And We bestowed upon him ls-haq and Ya qub as a grandson; and each one We made righteous.
And We made them leaders, guiding by Our command; and We revealed unto them the doing of good deeds and the establishment of prayer, and the giving of poor-rate; and of Us they were the worshippers.
And Lut! We vouchsafed unto him judgment and knowledge, and We delivered him out of the city which had been working foul deeds; verily they were a people evil, wicked.
And We caused him to enter into Our mercy; verily he was of the righteous.
And Nuh! recall what time he cried aforetime; so we answered him and delivered him and his house hold from a calamity mighty.
And We succoured him against the people who belied Our signs; verily they were a people evil, so we drowned them all.
And Daud and Sulaiman! recall what time they gave judgment regarding the tillage when certain people's sheep had pastured therein at night; and of the judgment concerning them We were the Witnesses.
So We gave the understanding thereof unto Sulaiman; and unto each We vouchsafed judgment and knowledge. And We so subjected the mountains that they shall hallow us along with Daud, and also the birds; and We were the doers.
And We taught him the art of making the coats of mail for you that it may protect you from your violence; are ye then thankful?
And unto Sulaiman We subjected the wind, strongly raging, running at his command toward the land wherein We had placed Our blessing; and of evrything We are the knowers.
And of the satans were some who dove for him, and worked a work beside that; and of them We were the Watchers.
And Ayyub! recall what time he cried unto his Lord: verily hurt hath touched me, and Thou art the Most Merciful of the mercifuls.
So We answered him and We removed that which was with him of the hurt, and We vouchsafed unto him his household and the like thereof along with them, as a mercy from us and a remembrance unto the worshippers.
And Isma'il and ldris and Zul-Kifl! each were of the patient.
And We caused them to enter into our mercy, verily they are of the righteous.
And Zun-nun! recall what time he departed in anger and imagined that We could not straiten him, then he cried in the darknesses, that: there is no god but Thou! hallowed be Thou! verily I have been of the wrong-doers.
So We answered him, and We delivered him from the distress, and Thus do We deliver the believers.
And Zakariyya! recall what time he cried unto his Lord: my Lord! leave me not solitary, though Thou art the best of heirs.
So We answered him, and We bestowed on him Yahya and We made sound for him his spouse. Verily they Were wont to vie with one anot her in good deeds and to call upon us with longing and dread, and they were ever before us meek.
And she who guarded her chastity! Then We breathed into her of Our spirit, and made her and her son a sign unto the worlds.
Verily this community of yours is a single community, and I am your Lord; so worship Me.
And they cut up their affair among them:, all are unto Us returners.
Whosoever worketh righteous works, and he is a believer, there shall be no denial of his endeavour; and We are for him the Writers.
And a ban is laid on every town which We have destroyed, that they Shall not return.
Until when Ya'juj and Ma'juj are let out, and from every mound they are trickling down.
And there shall approach the true promise; and lo! the eyes of those who disbelieved shall be staring: woe unto us! surely we have been in neglect thereof; aye! we have been the wrong-doers.
Verily ye and whatsoever ye worship beside Allah shall be firewood for Hell: thereunto ye shall go down.
Had these been gods, they would not have gone down thereunto; and all of them therein shall be abiders.
Theirs therein shall be roaring, and therein they shall hear not.
Verily those for whom the good reward hath preceded from Us, they therefrom shall be kept far away.
They shall not hear the least sound thereof, and in that felicity which their souls desire they shall be abiders.
The Great Terror shall grieve them not, and the angels will meet them: this is Your Day which ye were ever promised-
The Day whereon We shall roll up the heaven like as the rolling up of a scroll for books. Even as We began the first creation, We shall restore it: a promise binding upon Us; verily We have been the Doers.
And assuredly We have prescribed in the Scripture after the admonition, that: the land! there shall inherit it My bondmen righteous.
Verily in this in a preaching for a people who are worshippers.
And We have not sent thee except as a mercy unto the Worlds.
Say thou: this only hath been revealed unto me, that your god is only One God. submit ye then?!
Then if they turn away, say thou: I have proclaimed unto you all alike, and I know not whether nigh or far is that which ye are promised,
Verily He knoweth that which is public in speech, and He knoweth that which ye hide.
And know not; haply it may be a trial for you, and an enjoyment for a season.
He saith: my Lord! judge Thou with truth. And our Lord is the Compassionate Whose help is to be sought against that which ye utter.
