Alif, Lam, Mim,
Allah There is no god but He, the Living, the Sustainer.
He hath revealed unto thee the Book with truth confirming that which went before it; and He sent down the Taurat and Injil.
Aforetime, for a guidance unto the people, and sent down the criterion. Verily those who disbelieve in the signs of Allah Unto them shall be torment severe. And Allah is Mighty, Lord of Retribution.
Verily Allah aught is concealed from Him in the earth or in the
He it is Who fashionoth You in the Wombs as He will: there is no god but He, the Mighty, the Wise.
He it is who hath sent down unto thee the Book, wherein some verses are firmly constructed they are the mother of the Book: and others consimilar. But those in whose hearts is and deviation follow that which is consimilar therein, seeking discord and seeking to misinterpret the same whereas none knoweth the interpretation thereof a save Allah. And the firmly- grounded in knowledge Say: we believe therein, the whole is from our Lord. And none receiveth admonition save men of understanding.
Our Lord Suffer not our hearts to deviate after that Thou hast guided US, and bestow from Thine presence mercy. Verily Thou! Thou art the Bestower!
Our Lord! verily Thou art the Assembler of mankind for a Day whereof there is no doubt. Verily Allah faileth not the tryst.
Verily those who disbelieve-neither their riches nor their offspring shall avail them aught with Allah. and these! they shall be the fuel of the Fire.
After the wont of the people of Fir'awn and those before them. They belied Our signs, wherefore Allah laid hold of them for their sins. And Allah is Severe in chastising.
Say thou unto those who disbelieve: anon shall ye be overcome, and gathered unto Hell--an evil couch!
Of a surety there hath been unto you a sign, the two hosts that met, one host fighting in the way of Allah, and the other disbelieving, beholding themselves, with their own eyes, twice as many as they. And Allah aideth with His succour whomsoever He will. Verily herein is a lesson for men of insight.
Fair-seeming is made unto men the love of pleasurable things from women and children and talents heaped-up of gold and silver and horses branded up and cattle and tilth. All that is the enjoyment of the life of the World, and Allah! with Him is the best resort.
Say thou! Shall I declare unto you that which is better than these For those who fear Allah are Gardens with their Lord, there under rivers flow, wherein they shall be abiders, and spouses purified, and pleasure from Allah. And Allah is Beholder of His bondsmen
Those who say our Lord! verify we! we have believed, wherefore forgive us our sins, and protect us from the torment of the Fire.
The patient ones and the truthful ones and the devout ones and the expanders and the praying ones at early dawn for forgiveness.
Allah beareth witness - and also the angles and those endued with knowledge that there is no god but He, the Maintainer of equity: there is no god but He, the Mighty, the Wise.
Verily the religion with Allah is Islam and those Who Were vouchsafed the Book differed Not save after the knowledge had come unto them, out of spite among themselves. And whosoever disbelieveth in the revelations of Allah, then verily Allah swift at reckoning.
Wherefore if they contend with thee, say thou: have surrendered myself unto Allah and he who followeth me. And say thou unto those who have been vouchsafed the Book and unto the illiterates; do you (also) accept Islam? Then if they accept Islam, they are of a surety guided; and if they turn away, then upon thee is only the preaching, and Allah is Beholder of His bondsmen.
Verily those who disbelieve in the revelations of Allah and slay the prophets without justice and slay those among men who command equity thou unto them a torment afflictive.
These are they whose works have Come to naught in the world and the Hereafter, nor have they helpers.
Hast thou not observed those vouchsafed a portion of the Book called to the Book of Allah that it may judge between them? Then a party of them turn away and they are backsliders
That is because they say, the Fire shall touch us not save for a few days numbered. And there had deluded them in their religion that which they have been fabricating.
How shall it be then, when we shall gather them on the Day whereof there is no doubt, and every soul shall be repaid in full that which it hath earned, and they shall not be wronged.
Say thou: O Allah! sovereign of the dominion: Thou givest dominion unto whomsoever Thou wilt, and Thou takest away dominion from whomsoever Thou wilt; Thou honourest whomsoever Thou wilt, and Thou abasest whomsoever Thou wilt; and in Thine hand is good. And verily Thou art over every thing Potent.
Thou plungest night into day and Thou plungest day into night, and Thou bringest forth the living from the lifeless, and Thou bringest forth the lifeless from the living; and Thou providest for whomsoever Thou wilt without reckoning.
Let not the believers take unto themselves the infidels as friends, beside the believers: and whosoever doth that, then he is not in respect of Allah in aught, unless indeed ye fear from them a danger. And Allah maketh ye beware of Himself; and unto Allah is the last wending.
Say thou: Whether ye conceal that which is in your breasts or disclose it, Allah knoweth it, and He knoweth that which is in the heavens and in the earth; and Allah is over everything Potent.
The Day whereon each soul shall find presented whatsoever it hath worked of good and whatsoever it hath worked of evil, it would fain that there were betwixt it and that Day a wide space. And Allah maketh you beware of Himself: Allah is Tender unto His bondsmen.
Say thou: if ye, are wont to love Allah, then follow me, and Allah shall rove you and forgive you your sins; and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
Say thou: obey Allah and the apostle if thereafter they turn away. then verily Allah loveth not the infidels.
Verily did Allah choose Adam and Nuh and the house of lbrahim and the house of 'lmran out of the worlds
Progeny, one of the other, and Allah is Hearing, Knowing.
Recall what time the wife of 'lmran said my Lord verily have vowed unto Thee that which is in my belly to be dedicated; accept Thou then of me. Verily Thou! Thou art the Hearer, the Knower.
Then when she brought her forth, she said: my Lord verily have brought forth a female - and Allah knew best that which she had brought forth, - and the male is not as the female, and verily have named her Maryam, and verily seek refuge for her and her progeny with Thee from the Satan the accursed.
Then her Lord accepted her with goodly acceptance and made her grow up with a goodly growth, and He made Zakariyya take care of her. So oft as Zakariyya entered the apartment to see her, he found provision by her. He said: O Maryam! whence hast thou this! She said this is from before Allah. Verily Allah provideth for whomsoever He will without reckoning.
Forthwith Zakariyya prayed unto his Lord my Lord bestow on me from Thine presence a goodly offspring; verily Thou! Thou art the Hearer of prayer.
Then the angels called unto him even while he stood Praying in the apartment: verily Allah announceth unto thee Yahya confessing to a word from Allah, and a leader, and a chaste and a prophet of the righteous one.
He said: my Lord! in what wise shall there be unto me a youth whereas age hath overtaken me and my wife is barren. Allah said: even so: Allah doeth whatsoever He listeth.
He said: my Lord! appoint unto me a sign. Allah said: thy sign is that thou shalt not speak unto mankind for three days save by beckoning; and remember thy Lord much and hallow Him in the evening and morning.
And recall what time the angels said: O Maryam! verily Allah chose thee and purified thee and chose thee above the women of the worlds.
Maryam! be devout unto thy Lord, prostrate thyself, and bow down with them that bow down.
This is of the tidings of things hidden which We reveal unto thee and thou wast not with them when they cast their reeds as to which of them should take care of Maryam, nor wast thou with them when they disputed.
Recall what time the angels said: Maryam! verily Allah announceth unto thee a word from Him: his name Shall be the Masih, Isa, son of Maryam, illustrious in the world and the Hereafter and one of those brought nigh.
And he shall speak unto mankind from the cradle and in maturity; and be one of the righteous.
She said: my Lord! in what wise shall there be unto me a son whereas no human being hath touched me. Allah said: even so. Allah createth whatsoever He will, When He hath decreed a thing, He only saith to it: Be, and it becometh;
And He shall teach him the Book and wisdom and the Taurat and the Injil:
And an apostle Unto the children of Israi'l with this message: verily have come unto you with a sign from your Lord, verily I form for you out of clay as though the likeness of a bird and then I breathe thereunto, and a bird it becometh by Allah's command. And heal the blind from birth and the leprous and quicken the dead by Allah's command. And I declare unto you that which ye have eaten and that which ye have stored in your houses. Verily herein is a sign for you if ye are believers.
And I come confessing to the Taurat that was before me, and to allow unto you some of that which was forbidden unto you. So And I have come unto you with a sign from your Lord wherefore fear Allah and obey me.
Verily Allah is my Lord; and your Lord, wherefore worship Him; this is the straight path.
Then when 'Isa perceived in them infidelity, he said: who will be my helpers unto Allah! The disciples said; we are helpers of Allah; we believe in Allah and bear thou witness that verily we are Muslims.
Our Lord! we believe in that which Thou hast sent down, and, follow the apostle; write us up wherefore with the witnesses.
And they plotted, and Allah plotted, and Allah is the Best of plotters.
Recall what time Allah said: O 'Isa! verily I shall make thee die, and am lifting thee to myself and am purifying thee from those who disbelieve, and shall place those who follow thee above those who disbelieve until the Day of Resurrection; thereafter unto Me shall be the return of you all, then I shall judge between you of that wherein ye were wont to differ.
Then as for those who disbelieved I shall torment them with a severe torment in the world and the Hereafter, nor shall have they any helpers.
And as for those who believed and worked righteous works, He shall repay them their hires in full, and Allah loveth not the wrong-doers.
This which we recite unto thee is of the signs and of the wise admonition.
Verily the likeness of 'lsa with Allah is as the likeness of Adam: him He created out of dust, thereafter He said unto him: Be, and lo! he becometh.
This is the truth from thy Lord, wherefore be thou not of those who dubitate.
Wherefore those who contend with thee therein after that which hath come unto thee of the knowledge - say thou: come! let us call our sons and your sons, and our women and your women, and ourselves and yourselves, then let us humbly pray, and invoke the curse of Allah upon the liars.
Verily this! it is the true recital; and God there is none save Allah, and verily Allah! He is the Mighty, the Wise.
But if they turn away, then Allah is Knower of the corrupters.
Say thou: O people of the Book! come to a word common between us and between you; that we shall worship none save Allah's and that we shall not associate aught with Him, and that none of you shall take others as Lords beside Allah. Then if they turn away, say: bear witness that verily we are Muslims.
O people of the Book! wherefore contend ye concerning Ibrahim, whereas the Taurat and the Injil were not sent down save after him! Will ye not then under stand?
Ah! ye are those who fell to contending respecting that whereof ye had some knowledge, wherefore then should ye contend respecting that whereof ye have no knowledge! And Allah knoweth, and ye know not.
Ibrahim was not a Jew, nor a Nazarene, but he was an upright Muslim, nor was he of the associators.
Verily the nearest of mankind to Ibrahim, surely those who followed him, and this prophet, and those who believe; and Allah is the Patron of the believers.
Pain would a party of the people of the Book lead you astray, and none they lead astray save themselves, and they perceive not.
O people of the Book! wherefore disbelieve ye in the revelations of Allah whereas ye bear witness?
O people of the Book! wherefore confound ye the truth with falsehood, and hide the truths While ye know?
And a Party of the people of the Book say: believe in that which hath been sent down unto those who have believed, at the break of day, and disbelieve at the close thereof, haply they may turn away;
And believe not save one who followeth your religion. Say thou: verily the guidance of Allah - that is the guidance. Envy ye that any one should be vouchsafed the like of that which was vouchsafed unto you or fear ye that those others may overcome you in Contention before your Lord! Say thou: verily the grace is in the hand of Allah He vouchsafeth it unto whomsoever He will; and Allah is Bounteous, Knowing.
He singleth out for His mercy Whomsoever He will; And Allah is the Owner of mighty Grace.
And of the people of the Book is he whom if thou trustest with a talent, he will restore it unto thee, and among them is he whom if thou trustest with a dinar, he will not restore it unto thee except thou art ever standing over him that is because they say there is in the matter of the illiterates no call on us. And they forge a lie against Allah while they know.
Aye whosoever keepeth his covenant and feareth Allah--then verily Allah loveth the God-fearing.
Verily those who barter Allah's covenant and their oaths at a Small price- no portion is theirs in the Hereafter; nor shall Allah speak unto them or look at them on the Day of Resurrection, nor shall He cleanse them, and theirs shall be a torment afflictive.
And verily among them, are a party who pervert the Book with their tongues, that ye might deem it of the Book whereas it is not of the Book. And they say it is from God; whereas it is not from Allah, and they forge a lie against Allah while they know.
It is not Possible for a human being unto whom Allah hath vouchsafed the Book and Wisdom and prophethood that he should thereafter say unto men: be ye worshippers of me, beside Allah; but be ye faithful servants of the Lord, seeing that ye are wont to teach the Books and seeing that ye are wont to exercise yourselves therein.
And he would not command you that ye should take the angels and the prophets for lords. Would he command you to infidelity after ye are become Muslims?
And recall what time Allah took a bond from the prophets saying whatever I vouchsafed unto you of Book and Wisdom, end, thereafter there cometh unto you an apostle confessing to that which is with you, ye shall surely believe in him and succour him. He said: assent ye, and take ye My burthen thereunto They said: we assent. He said: then bear Witness, and I, with you among the witnesses.
Wherefore whosoever shall turn away thereafter -those then! they are the transgressors.
Seek they then other than the religion of Allah Whereas unto Him hath submitted whosoever is in the heavens and the earth willingly or unwillingly, and unto Him shall they all be returned.
Say thou: we believe in Allah and in that which is sent down unto us, and that which was sent down unto Ibrahim and Isma'il and Is-haq and Ya'qub and the tribes, and that which was vouchsafed unto Musa and 'Isa and other prophets from their Lord: we differentiate not between any of them, and unto Him we are submistive.
And whosoever will seek a religion other than Islam, it shall not be accepted of Him, and he shall be of the losers in the Hereafter.
How shall Allah guide a people who disbelieved after their belief and after they bore witness that the apostle was true and after evidences had come unto them! And Allah guideth not a wrong-doing people.
These! their meed is that on them shall be the curse of Allah and of angles and of mankind, all;
Abiders therein, their torment shall not be lightened nor shall they be respited.
Save such shall repent thereafter and amend; verily Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
Verily those who disbelieve after they have believed and thereafter wax in infidelity, their- repentance shall by no means be accepted. These! they are the straying ones.
Verily those who disbelieve and die while they are infidels, not an earthful of gold shall be accepted from any such, were he to offer it as a ransom. These! theirs shall be a torment afflictive, nor shall they have any helpers.
O Ye shall not attain unto virtue until ye expend of that which ye love; and whatsoever ye expend, verily Allah Is thereof Knower.
Every foods was allowable unto the Children of Isra'il, save that which Isra'il had forbidden unto himself, ere the Taurat was revealed. Say thou: bring ye then the Taurat and recite it, if ye say sooth.
Then whosoever fabricateth after this, lie against Allah - these! they are the wrong-doers.
Say thou: Allah hath spoken the truth; follow therefore the faith of Ibrahim the upright; and he was not of the associators.
Verily the first House set apart unto mankind was that at Bakka, blest, and a guidance unto the worlds.
Therein are signs manifest, the station of Ibrahim. And whosoever entereth it shall be secure. And incumbent on mankind is pilgrimage to the House for that good-will of Allah: on him who is able to find a way thereunto. And whosoever disbelieveth, then verily Allah is Independent of the worlds.
Say thou: O People of the Book! wherefore disbelieve ye in the revelations of Allah, whereas Allah is witness of that which ye work!
Say thou: O people of the Book! wherefore turn ye aside from the way of Allah those who believe, seeking for it crookedness, while ye are witnesses! And Allah is not neglectful of that which ye work.
O Ye who believe! were ye to obey any party amongst those that have been vouchsafed the Book, they would, after your having believed, render you Infidels.
How can you disbelieve while unto you are recited the revelations of Allah, and in your midst is His apostle! And whosoever holdeth fast to Allah, he is of a surety guided unto a straight path.
O Ye who believe! fear Allah with fear due to Him, and die not except ye be Muslims.
And hold ye fast, all of you, to the cord of Allah, so and separate not. And remember Allah's favour unto you in that ye were enemies and He joined your hearts together, so ye became by His favour brethren; and ye were on the brink of an abyss of the Fire and He rescued you therefrom. In this wise Allah expoundeth unto you His revelations that haply ye may remain guided.
And let there be of you a community calling others to good and commanding that which is reputable and prohibiting that which is disreputable. And these they are the blissful.
And be not like unto those who separated and differed among themselves after there had come unto them evidences. These! for them shall be a torment mighty.
On a day whereon faces become whitened and faces become blackened. Then as for those whose faces shall have become blackened: disbelieved ye after your profession of belief! taste the torment for that ye have been disbelieving.
And as for those whose faces shall have become whitened-- they shall be in Allah's mercy; therein they shall be abiders.
These are revelations of Allah; We rehearse them unto thee with truth, and Allah intendeth not wrong unto the worlds.
Allah's is whatsoever is in the heavens and in the earth; and unto Allah shall be committed all affairs.
O Ye are the best community sent forth unto mankind; ye command that which is reputable and ye prevent that which is disreputable. and ye believe in Allah If the people of the Book believe, surely it were better for them. Of them are believers, and most of them are transgressors.
They shall not be able to harm you save with small hurt, and if they fight you, they shall turn upon you their backs; then they shall be succoured not.
Stuck upon them is abjection wheresoever they may be come upon, except in a compact with Allah and a compact with men; and they drew upon themselves indignation from Allah; and stuck upon them is poverty. That is because they have been disbelieving in the signs of Allah, and slaying the prophets without justice. That is because they disobeyed and have been trespassing.
Not are they all alike. Of the people of the Book there are a community steadfast, reciting the revelations of Allah in the hours of night while they prostrate themselves.
And they believe in Allah and the Last Day and command that which is reputable and prohibit that which is disreputable, and vie with each other to virtues. And these are of the righteous.
And whatsoever they do of virtue shall not be denied. And Allah is Knower of the God-fearing.
Verily those who disbelieve, neither their riches nor their progeny shall avail them aught against Allah. And these are the fellows of the Fire; thereinto they shall be abiders.
The likeness of that which they expend in this life of the world is as the likeness of a wind wherein is intense cold, it befalleth the tilth of a people who have wronged themselves, and destroyeth it. Allah wronged them not, but themselves they wrong.
O Ye who believe! take not for an intimate anyone besides yourselves; they shall not be remiss in doing you mischief. Fain would they that which distresseth you. Surely their malice hath shewn itself by their mouths, and that which their breasts conceal is greater still. Surely We have expounded unto you the signs, if ye will but reflect.
Lo! it is you who love them whereas they love you not, and you believe in the Book, all of it. When they meet you, they say: we believe. And when they are alone, they bite their fingertips at you in rage. Say thou: die in your rage. Verily Allah is Knower of that which is in the breasts.
If there happenoth unto you any good it grieveth them, and if there happenoth unto you an ill, they rejoice thereat. And if ye remain persevering and God-fearing their guile shall not harm you at all. Verily Allah is of that which they work Encompasser.
And recall what time thou settedst forth from thy household early to settle believers in positions for the fight. And Allah is Hearing, Knowing.
Recall what time two sections of you bethought that they should flag whereas Allah was the Patron of the twain. In Allah, then, let the believers trust.
And assuredly Allah had succoured you at Badr While ye were humble. Wherefore fear Allah that haply ye may return thanks.
And Recall what time thou saidst to the believers: sufficieth it not unto that your lord should reinforce you with three thousand angels sent down.
O Yea! if ye but remain persevering and God-fearing, and they should come upon you in this rush of theirs, your Lord shall reinforce you with five thousand angels marked.
And this Allah made not except as a joyful enunciation unto you, and that thereby your hearts might be set at rest--and no succour is there but from before Allah, the Mighty, the Wise.
That He may cut: off a portion of those who disbelieve, or abase them so that they may go back disappointed.
Not with thee is aught of the affair: He shall either relent toward them or torment them, for verily they are wrong-doers.
Allah's is whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth. He forgiveth whomsoever He listeth, and tormenteth whomsoever He listeth. And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
O Ye who believe! devour not multiplied manifold; and fear usury, Allah, haply ye may fare well.
And beware of the Fire gotten ready for the infidels.
And obey Allah and the apostle, haply ye may be shewn mercy.
And vie with each other in hastening to obtain forgiveness from your Lord and toward the Garden whereof the width equalleth the heavens and the earth, gotten ready for the God- fearing
Those who expend in weal and woe, and the repressors of rage and the pardoners of men; and Allah loveth the doers of good.
And those, who, when they have done an ill-deed or wronged themselves, remember Allah and ask forgiveness of their sins - and who forgiveth sins save Allah! Is --and persist not in that which they have done, while they know.
Those! their meed is forgiveness from their Lord and Gardens whereunder rivers flow; they shall be abiders therein. Excellent is the hire of the workers!
Dispensations have gone forth before you go about then on the earth, and behold what wise hath been the end of the beliers!
This in exposition unto mankind and a guidance and an admonition unto the God-fearing.
And faint not, nor grieve; ye shall overcome, if ye are believers.
If there hath befallen you a sore, a sore like thereunto hath already befallen that people. These are the haps that We change about among man kind, that Allah may know those who believe and may take martyrs from among you and Allah loveth not the wrong doers.
And that Allah may purge those who believe and destroy the infidels.
Or, deem ye that ye shall enter the Garden while yet Allah hath not known those of you who have striven hard nor yet known the steadfast!
And assuredly ye were wont to long for death ere ye had met it. Now ye are beholding it even while ye are looking on.
And Muhammad is naught but an apostle; apostles have surely passed away before him. Will ye then, if he dieth or be slain, turn round on your heels! And whosoever turnoth round on his heels, hurteth not Allah at all. And anon shall Allah recompense the grateful.
It is not Possible for any person to die except by Allah's command at a term recorded. And whosoever desireth the reward of the world, We vouchsafe unto him thereof. and whosoever desireth the reward of the Hereafter, We vouchsafe unto him thereof. And anon will we recompense the grateful.
And many a prophet hath fought With a number of godly men beside him. They fainted not for aught that befell them in the way of Allah, nor they weakened, nor they humbled themselves; and Allah loveth the steadfast.
And their speech was naught but that they said: our Lord! forgive us our sins and our extravagance in our affairs, and make our foothold firm, and make us triumph over the disbelieving people.
Wherefore Allah vouchsafed unto them the reward of the World, and the excellent reward of the Hereafter. And Allah loveth the well-doer.
O O Ye who believe! if ye obey those who disbelieve, they will send you back on your heels, and ye will turn back losers.
But: Allah is your Friend, and He is the Best of helpers.
Anon shall We cast a terror into the hearts of those who disbelieve, for they have associated with Allah that for which Allah hath sent down no warranty, and their resort is the Fire: vile is the abode of the wrong-doers!
And Allah had assuredly made good His promise unto you when ye were extirpating them by His leave, until when ye flagged and ye disagreed about the command and ye disobeyed after He had shewn you that for which ye longed. Of you some desired the World and of you some desired the Hereafter, wherefore He turned you away from them that he might prove; and of a surety He hath pardoned you And Allah is Gracious unto the believers.
And recall what time ye were running off and would not look back on any one, albeit the apostle In your rear was calling unto you. Wherefore He caused sorrow to overtake you for sorrow. that ye might not grieve for that which ye might lose nor for that which might befall you. And Allah is Aware of that which ye Work.
Then, after sorrow, He sent down unto you a security-- slumber coming over a section of you; While anot her section, concerned about themselves, bethought of Allah unjustly: the thought of paganism. They said: have we aught at all of the affair? Say thou: the affair is wholly Allah's. They hide within themselves that which they disclose not unto thee, saying: had we aught of the affair, we would not have been slain here. Say thou: had ye stayed in your houses, even then those decreed to be slain would surely have gone forth to their places of slaughter; and this happened in order that he might prove that which was in your breasts, and purge that which was in your hearts; and Allah is Knower of that which is in the breasts.
As for those of you who turned back on the day the two hosts met, it was the Satan who made them slip because of something they had earned; and of a surety Allah hath pardoned them. Verily, Allah is Forgiving, Forbearing.
O O Ye who believe! be not like unto those who disbelieve and say of their brethren when they journey in the land or go to religious war: had they been with, they had not died nor had they been slain; this is in order that Allah may cause an anguish in their hearts. And it is Allah who maketh alive and causeth to die, and Allah is of that which ye work Beholder.
Verily if ye be slain in the way of Allah or die, forgiveness from Allah and mercy are surely better than that which they amass.
And whether ye die or be slain, assuredly unto Allah shall ye be gathered.
It was then of the mercy of Allah that thou hast been gentle with them; and wert thou rough, hardhearted, they had surely dispersed from around thee. So pardon them thou, and ask thou forgiveness for them and take thou counsel with them in the affair, and when thou hast resolved, put thy trust in Allah. Verily Allah loveth the trustful.
If Allah succoureth you, there is none that can overcome you; if He abandon you, who is there that can succour you after Him? And in Allah let the believers trust.
It is not the part of a prophet to hide anything away: whosoever hideth anything away, he shall bring forth on the Day of Resurrection that which he had hidden away; then shall each one be repaid in full that which he hath earned, and they shall not be wronged.
Is then one who followeth the pleasure of Allah like unto him who hath settled under the displeasure of Allah? His resort is Hell, and ill is that destination
Of diverse degrees shall be they with Allah, and Allah is Beholder of that which they work.
Assuredly Allah hath conferred a benefit on the believers when He raised up unto them an apostle from amongst themselves, he rehearseth unto them His revelations and purifieth them and teacheth them the Book and wisdom, and afore they were in an error manifest.
Is its that when a reverse hath befallen you, albeit ye had inflicted twice as much, ye say: whence is this? Say thou: it is but from yourselves verily Allah is over everything potent.
And that which befell you on the day whereon the two hosts met was by Allah's leave, and that he might know the believers.
And that he might know those who played the hypocrite. And it was said unto them: come ye, fight in the way of Allah or defend. They said: if we knew it was to be a fair fight We would surely have followed you. Nearer were they on that day to infidelity than to belief. They say with their mouths that which is not in their hearts and Allah knoweth best that which they conceal.
They say of their brethren, while they themselves staid: had they obeyed us they had not been slain. Say thou: then repel death from yourselves if ye say sooth.
And reckon not thou those slain in the way of Allah to be dead. Nay, they are alive, and with their Lord, and provided for.
Exulting in that which Allah hath vouchsafed them of His grace. And they rejoice in those who have not yet joined them from behind them, in the thought that unto them no fear shall come, nor shall they grieve.
They rejoice at the favour of Allah and His grace, and that verily Allah wasteth not the hire of the believers.
Those who answered to the call of Allah and the apostle after the wound that befell them --for those who did well among them and feared God shall be a mighty hire-
Those unto whom when certain men said: verily the people have mustered strong against you, so be afraid of them, it only increased them in belief, and they said: sufficient unto us is Allah, and an excellent Trustee is He!
They then returned with a favour from Allah and His grace: no evil touched them: and they followed Allah's pleasure and Allah is Owner of mighty grace.
It is only that the Satan frighteth you of his friends, wherefore fear them not, but fear Me, if ye are believers.
And let not those grieve thee who hasten toward infidelity; verily they shall not harm Allah at all. Allah desireth not to provide for them a portion in the Hereafter; and theirs shall be a torment mighty.
Verily those who have purchased infidelity for belief shall not hurt Allah at all, and theirs shall be a torment afflictive.
And let not those who disbelieve deem that We respite them for their good: We respite them only that they may increase in sin; and theirs shall be a torment ignominious.
Allah is not one to leave the believers in the state wherein ye are until He hath discriminated the impure from the pure. And Allah is not one to acquaint you with the Unseen, but Allah chooseth him whomsoever He willeth, of His apostles. Believe wherefore in Allah and His apostles; and if ye believe and fear, yours shall be a mighty hire.
And let not those who stint with that which Allah hath vouchsafed them in His grace deem that this is good for them: nay! it is bad for them; anon shall that wherewith they stint be hung round their necks on the Day of Judgement. And Allah's is the heritage of the heavens and the earth; and Allah is of that which ye work Aware.
Assuredly Allah hath heard the saying of those who say: verily Allah is poor and we are rich. Surely We shall write down that which they have said and their slaying of the prophets with- out justice, and We shall say taste the torment of the burning.
That is for that which your hands have sent on afore, for verily Allah is not a wronger of His bondmen.
There are those who say. verily God hath covenanted with us that we should believe not in an apostle until he bring unto us a sacrifice which a fire shall devour. Say thou: surety there came unto you apostles before me with evidences and with that which ye speak of, wherefore then did ye slay them, if ye say sooth?
If then they belie thee, even so were belied apostles before thee who came with evidences and scriptures, and the luminous Book.
Every soul Shall taste of death and only on the Day of Resurrection ye will be repaid your hire in full. Then whosoever shall be removed far away from the Fire and made to enter into the Garden, he indeed hath achieved the goal; and the life of the world is naught but an illusory enjoyment.
O Ye shall surely be proven in your riches and in your lives; and will surely bear much hurt from those who were vouchsafed the Book before you and from those who associate gods, and if ye endure and fear, then verily that is of the commandments determined.
And recall what time Allah took a bond from those who were vouchsafed the Book: ye shall surely expound it to the people and ye shall hide it not; whereafter they cast it behind their backs, and bartered it for a small price. Vile is that wherewith they have bartered.
Bethink not thou that those who exult in that which they have brought and love to De praised for that which they have not done, - bethink not thou that they shall be in security from the torment! And theirs shall be a torment afflictive.
Allah's is the dominion of the heavens and the earth. and Allah is over everything Potent.
Verily in the creation of the heavens and the earth and in the alter nation of the night and the day are signs Unto the men of understanding.
Who remember- Allah Standing and sitting and lying on their sides, and reflect on the creation of the heavens and the earth: our Lord Thou createdest not all this in vain. Hallowed be Thou! Save us, Thou, from the torment of the Fire!
Our Lord verily whomsoever Thou makest to enter into the Fire, him Thou hast surely humiliated and for the wrong-doers there shall be no helpers.
Our Lord verily we heard a caller calling to belief: believe in your Lord, wherefore we have come to believe. Our Lord forgive us our sins, and expiate from us our misdeeds, and let us die along with the pious.
Our Lord! vouchsafe unto us that which Thou hast promised us by Thine apostles, and humiliate us not on the Day of Resurrection. Verily Thou failest not the tryst.
Then their Lord hearkened unto them saying: I let not the work of a worker amongst you to waste, man or woman, one of you from the other. So those who emigrated and were driven forth from their homes and persecuted in My cause, and who fought and were slain, surely I shall expiate from them their misdeeds and surely I shall make them enter Gardens whereunder rivers flow; a reward from before Allah! And Allah! with Him is the excellent reward.
Let not beguile thee the moving to and fro about of those who disbelieve, in the cities
A brief enjoyment, and then Hell shall be their abode; ill is the resort!
But as to those who fear their Lord, theirs shall be Gardens whereunder rivers flow; they shall be abiders therein: an entertainment from before their Lord; and that which is with Allah it still better for the pious.
And verily of the people of the Book there are some who believe in Allah and in that which hath been sent down unto you and that which hath been sent down unto them, humbling themselves before Allah, and barter not the revelations of Allah for a small price, these they shall have their hire with Allah. Verily Allah swift in reckoning.
O Ye who believe! persevere, and excel in perseverance and be ever ready, and fear Allah that haply ye may thrive.
