Ya-Sin.
By the Qur'an full of wisdom.
Verily thou art of the sent ones,
upon the straight path.
This is a revelation of the Mighty, the Merciful.
That thou mayest warn a people whose fathers were not warned; so they are negligent.
Assuredly the word hath been justified against most of them, wherefore they shall not believe.
Verily We have placed on their necks shackles which are up to the chins; so that their heads are forced up.
And We have placed before them a barrier and behind them a barrier, so We have covered them, so that they see not.
And it is alike Unto them, whather thou warnest them or warnest them not; they shall not believe.
Thou canst warn only him who followeth the admonition and feareth the Compassionate, unseen. So bear thou Unto him the glad tidings of forgiveness and a generous hire.
Verily We! We shall guicken the dead. And We write down that which they send before and their footsteps. And everything We have counted up in a Book luminous.
And propound thou Unto them the similitude of the inhabitants of a town, When there came thereto the sent ones;
What time We sent Unto them two, then they belied the twain, wherefore We strengthened them with a third, and they said: verily we are Unto you the sent ones.
They said: ye are but human beings like ourselves; the Compassionate hath not sent down aught; ye are only lying.
They said: our Lord knoweth that we are surely Unto you the sent ones.
And on us is naught but manifest preaching.
They said: verily we augur ill of you; if ye desist not, we shall surely stone you, and there will befall you from us a torment afflictive.
They said: your evil augury be with you. Call ye it an ill- luck because ye are admonished! Aye! ye are a people extravagant.
And there came from the farthest part of the town a man running. He said; O my people! follow the sent ones.
Follow those who ask not of you any hire, and who are rightly guided.
And what aileth me that I should not worship Him who hath created me, and Unto whom ye shall be returned.
Shall I take beside Him gods when, if the Compassionate should intend me any harm, their intercession will avail me not at all, nor would they save me?
Verily then I should be in error manifest.
Verily I believe now in your Lord; so hearken Unto me."
It was said: enter thou the Garden. He said: would that my people knew.
That my Lord hath forgiven me, and hath made me of the honoured ones.
And We sent not against his people after him a host from heaven, nor have We been sending down any such.
It was but one shout, and lo! they were extinct.
Ah the misery of the bondmen! there cometh not: Unto them an apostle but him they have been mocking.
Behold they not how many We have destroyed before them of the generations! verily Unto them they shall not return.
And surely all, every one of them, shall be brought before us.
And a sign Unto them is the dead land. We quicken it and therecut We bring forth grain, so that thereof they eat.
And We place therein gardens of the date-palms and vines; and We therein cause to gush forth springs.
That they may eat of the fruit thereof; and their hands worked it not. Will they not, therefore, give thanks?
Hallowed be He who hath created all the pairs of that which the earth groweth, and of themselves and of that which they know not!
And a sign Unto them is the night. We draw off the day therefrom, and lo! they are darkened.
And the sun runneth to its appointed term: that is the disposition of the Mighty, the Knowing."
And the moon! For it We have decreed mansions till it reverteth like the old branch of a palm-tree.
It is not permitted to the sun that it should overtake the moon, nor can the night outstrip the day: each in an orbit, they float.
And a sign Unto them is that We bear their offspring in a laden ship.
And We have created for them of the like thereUnto whereon they ride.
And if We list, We shall drown them, and there will be no shout for them, nor will they be saved.
unless it be a mercy from us, and as an enjoyment for a season.
And when it is said Unto them: fear that which is before you and that which is behind you, that haply ye may find mercy, they withdraw.
And not a sign cometh Unto them of the signs of their Lord, but they are ever backsliders therefrom.
And when it is said Unto them: expend of that wherewith Allah hath provided you, those who disbelieve say Unto those who believe: shall we feed those whom God Himself would have fed, if He listed? Ye are in naught else than error manifest.
And they say: when will this promise be fulfilled if ye say sooth?
They await not but one shout, which shall lay hold of them while they are yet wrangling.
And they will not be able to make a disposition, nor to their family they return.
And the trumpet shall be blown, and lo! from the tombs Unto their Lord they shall be hastening.
They will say: Ah woe Unto us! who hath roused us from our sleeping-place? This is that which the Compassionate had promised, and truly spake the sent ones.
It shall be but one shout; and lo! they shall all be brought together before us.
To-day no soul will be wronged at all; nor shall ye be requited but for that which ye have been working.
Verily the fellows of the Garden to-day shall be happily employed.
They and their spouses, in shade on couches shall be reclining.
Theirs shall be fruit therein and theirs shall be whatsoever they ask for.
Peace shall be the word from the Lord Merciful.
And separate yourselves this Day, O ye culprits!
Enjoined I not on you, ye children of Adam, that ye shall not worship the Satan - verily he is Unto you manifest foe.
And that: ye shall worship Me; this is the straight path?
And yet assuredly he hath led astray of you a great multitude. Wherefore reflect ye not?
Yonder is Hell, which ye were promised.
Roast therein To-day for that ye have been disbelieving.
To-day We shall seal upon their mouths, and their hands will speak Unto us, and their feet will bear witness of that which they have been earning.
And if We listed, surely We should wipe out their eyes so that they would struggle for the way how then would they see?
And if We listed, surely We should transform them in their places, so that they would be able neither to go forward nor to return
And whomsoever We grant long life, We reverse him in creation. Reflect then they not?
And We have not taught him poetry, nor it befitteth him. This is but an admonition and a Recital luminous:
In order that it may warn him who is alive, and that the sentence may be justified on the infidels.
Observe they not that We have created for them, of that which Our hands have worked, cattle: so that they are their owners.
And We have subdued them Unto them, so that some of them they have for riding and on some of them they feed?
And they have therefrom other benefits and drinks. Will they not then give thanks?
And they have taken beside Allah gods, hoping that haply they may be succoured.
They are not able to give them succour; whereas they shall be against them host brought forward.
So let not their speech grieve thee. Verily We! We know whatsoever they keep secret and whatsoever they make known.
Beholdest not man that We have created him from a sperm? Yet lo! he is a manifest disputer?
And he propoundeth for us a similitude, and forgetteth his creation, He saith: who shall quicken the bones when they are decayed?
Say thou:" He shall quicken them Who brought them forth for the first time, and He is of every kind of creation the Knower!
Who giveth you out of the green tree fire, and lo! ye kindle therewith.
Is not He who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of these? Yea! He is the Supreme Creator, the Knower.
His affair, when He intendeth a thing, is only that He saith Unto it: be, and it becometh.
Wherefore hallowed be He in whose hand is the governance of everything, and Unto whom ye shall be returned.
