The revelation of this Book is from Allah, the Mighty, the Wise.
Verily We! We have sent down the Book Unto thee With truth: wherefore worship thou Allah, making exclusion for Him in religion.
LO! for Allah is the religion exclusive. And those who take patrons beside Him, saying: We Worship them not save in order that they may bring us nigh Unto God in approach - -verily Allah will judge between them concerning that wherein they differ. Verily Allah guideth not him who is a liar and ingrate.
Had Allah willed to take a son, He could have chosen whatsoever He pleased out of that which He hath created. Hallowed be He! He is Allah the One, the Subduer.
He hath created the heavens and the earth with truth. He rolleth the night around the day, and rolleth the day around the night, and He hath subjected the sun and the moon: each running on for a term appointed! Lo! He is the Mighty, the Forgiver.
He created you Of a Single soul, and made his spouse therefrom; and of the cattle He sent down Unto you eight pairs. He createth you in the bellies of your mothers, one creation after creation, in a threefold darkness. Such is Allah, your Lord. His is the dominion, there is no god but He. Whither then turn ye away?
If ye disbelieve, then verily Allah is Independent of you. And He approveth not of infidelity in His bondmen. And if ye return thanks He approveth of that in you. No burdened soul shall bear another's burthen. Thereafter Unto your Lord is Your return; and He shall declare Unto you that which ye have been Working. Verily He is the Knower of that which is in the breasts.
And when some hurt toucheth man, he calleth upon his Lord, turning Unto Him in penitence; then when He bestoweth upon him a favour from Himself, he forgetteth that for which he called on Him afore, and setteth up peers Unto Allah that He may lead astray others from His way Say thou: enjoy thou life in thy infidelity for a while, verily thou art of the fellows of the Fire.
Is he who is devout, in the watches of the night prostrating himself and standing, bewaring of the Hereafter and hoping for the mercy of his Lord to be dealt with like a wicked infidel? Say thou: shall they who know and those who know not be held equal? It is only men of understanding who receive admonition.
Say thou: O Mine bondmen who believe! fear your Lord. For those who do good in this world there is good: and Allah's earth is spacious. Verily the patient shall be paid in full their hire without reckoning.
Say thou: verily I am commanded to worship Allah, making for Him religion exclusive.
And I am commanded this, in order I may be the first Of those who submit.
Say thou: verily fear, if I disobeyed my Lord, torment of a Day mighty.
Say thou: it is Allah I worship, making for Him my religion exclusive
So worship whatsoever ye will, besidev him. Say thou: verily the losers are those who shall have lost themselves and their household" on the Day of judgment LO! that will be a loss manifest.
For them! above them shall be coverings of Fire and beneath them coverings. Therewith Allah affrighteth His bondmen. O My bondmen! wherefore fear Me.
And those who avoid the devils lest they should worship them and turn Unto Allah in penitence, for them are glad tidings. Wherefore give thou glad tidings Unto My bondmen,
Who hearken Unto the word and follow that which is the exceLlent there of. These are they whom Allah hath guided, and those are men of understanding.
Is he then on whom is justified the decree of torment - wilt thou rescue him who is in the Fire?
But those whofear their Lord, for them are lofty chambers with lofty chambers above them, built whereunder rivers flow: the promise of Allah, and Allah faileth not the appointment.
Beholdest thou not that Allah sendeth down water from the heaven, and causeth it to enter springs in the earth, and thereafter produceth thereby corn various coloured. Thereafter it wirhereth, and thou beholdest it turn yellow; then He maketh it chaff. Verily herein is an admonition for men of understanding.
Shall he then whose breast Allah hath expanded for Islam, so that he followeth a light from his Lord be as he whose heart is hardened? Then woe Unto those whose hearts are hardened against remembrance of Allah. They are in an error manifest.
Allah hath revealed the most excellent discourse, a Book consimilar oft-repeated, whereat trembleth the skins of these who fear their Lord; then their skins and their hearts soften at the remembrance of Allah. This is Allah's guidance, wherewith He guideth whomsoever He will. And whomsoever Allah sendeth astray, for him there is no guide.
Is he, then, who will shield himself with his face from the evil of torment on the Day of Resurrection be as he who is secure therefrom And it shall be said Unto the wrong-doers: taste ye that which ye have been earning.
Those before them belied, wherefore the torment came on them whence they knew not.
So Allah made them taste humiliation in the life of the world. And surely the torment of the Hereafter is greater - if they but know!
And assuredly We have propounded for mankind in this Qur'an all kinds of similitudes, that haply they may be admonished.
An Arabic Qur'an, wherein there is no crookedness, that haply they may fear.
Allah propoundeth a similitude: man having several partners,"quarelling, and a man wholly belonging to one man. Are the two equal in likeness? All praise Unto Allah. But most of them know not.
Verily thou art mortal, and verily they are mortals.
Then verily on the Day of Resurrection, before your Lord ye shall contend.
And who is a greater wrong-doer than he who fabricateth a lie against Allah, and belieth the truth when it cometh Unto him? Will not in Hell be an abode for the infidels?
And whosoever bringeth the truth, and whosoever giveth credence thereto - these! they are the God-fearing.
Theirs will be whatsoever they will desire with their Lord: that is the hire of the well-doers.
That through this Promise Allah may expiate from them the worst of that which they may have worked, and may recompense them their hire for the best of that which they have been working.
Is not Allah sufficient for His bondman? Yet they would frighten thee with those beside Him? And whomsoever Allah sendeth astray, for him there shall be no guide.
And whomsoever Allah guideth, for him there shall be no misleader. Is not Allah Mighty, and Lord of Retribution?
And wert thou to ask them: who hath created the heavens and the earth? they will surely say: Allah. Say thou: bethink ye then that those whom ye call upon beside Allah, - could they if Allah intended some hurt for me, remove His hurt? or if He intended some mercy for me, could they withhold His mercy? Say thou: enough for me is Allah; in Him the trusting put their trust.
Say thou: my nation! work according to your condition; I am going to work in my way; presently ye shall come to know.
On whom cometh a torment humiliating him, and on whom alighteth a torment lasting.
Verily We! We have sent down Unto thee the Book for mankind? with truth. Then whosoever receiveth guidance, it is for his soul and whosoever strayeth, strayeth only to its hurt; and thou art not over them a trustee.
Allah it is who taketh away souls at the time of their death, and those which die not in their sleep: then He withhold those on which He hath decreed death, and sendeth back the rest for an appointed term. Verily herein are signs for a people who ponder.
Have they taken others for intercessors beside Allah! Say thou: What! even though they own not aught and understand not?
Say thou: Allah's is intercession altogether. His is the dominion of the heavens and the earth; then Unto Him shall ye be returned.
And when Allah alone is mentioned, then shrink with eversion the hearts of those who believe not in the Hereafter, and when those beside Him are mentioned, lo! they rejoice.
Say thou: O Allah! Creator of the heavens and the earth! Knower of the hidden and the open! Thou shalt judge between Thy bondmen concerning that wherein they have been differing.
And were those who did wrong to own all that is in the earth, and there with as much again, they shall surely seek to ransom themselves therewith from the evil of the torment on the Day of Judgment; and there shall appear Unto them from Allah that whereon they had not been reckoning,
And there shall appear Unto them the evils that they earned, and there shall surround them that whereat they had been mocking.
When hurt toucheth a man he calleth on us, and thereafter, when We have changed it Unto a favour from Us, he saith: have been given itso only by force of my knowledge. Aye! it is a trial, but most of them know not.
Surely those who were before them said it, yet there availed them not that which they had been earning.
And there befell them the evils of that which they had earned. And of these they who go wrong-anon will befall them the evils of that which they earn; nor can they frustrate.
Know they not that Allahs expandeth provision for whomsoever He will, and stinteth it for whomsoever He will! Verily herein are signs for a people who believe.
Say thou: my bondmen who have committed extravagance against themselves despair not of the mercy of Allah; verily Allah will forgive the sins altogether. Verily He! He is the Forgiving, the Merciful.
And turn penitently Unto your Lord and submit Unto Him ere there cometh Unto you the torment, and then ye shall not be succoured.
And follow the best of that which hath been sent down Unto you from your Lord there cometh on you torment of a sudden, while ye perceive not.
Lest a soul should say: Alas! for that I have been remiss in respect of Allah, and I was but of the scoffers!
Or, lest it should say: had Allah but guided me, I should surely have been of the God-fearing!
Or lest it should say, when it will behold the torment: were there for me a return I would be of the well-doers.
Yea! surely there came Unto thee My revelations, but thou beliedest them and wast stiff-necked and wast of the infidels.
And on the Day of Judgment thou Shalt see those who lied against Allah - their faces blackened. Is not in Hell the abode of the stiff-necked?
And Allah will deliver those who feared Him to their place of safety. Evil will not touch them, nor will they grieve.
Allah is the Creator everything, And He is over everything a Trustee.
His are the keys of the heavens and the earth and those who disbelieve in the revelations of Allah-those! they are the losers.
Say thou: is it other than Allah that ye command me to worship! O ye pagans
And assuredly it hath been revealed Unto thee and Unto those before thee: if thou associatest surely of non-effect shall be made thy work, and thou shalt surely be of the losers.
Aye! Allah must thou worship, and be among the thankful.
And they estimated not Allah with an estimation due Unto Him whereas the whole earth shall be His handful on the Day of Judgment, and the heavens shall be rolled in His right hand. Hallowed be He and Exalted above that which they associate.
And the trumpet will be blown, when whosoever are in the heavens and whosoever are on the earth will swoon away, save him whomsoever Allah willeth. Then it shall be blown again, and lo! They will be standing, looking on.
And the earth will gleam with the light of its Lord, and the Record shall be set up, and the prophets and the witnesses will be brought and judgment will be given between them with truth, and they will not be wronged.
And each soul will be paid in full that which it hath worked; and He is the Best Knower of which they do.
And those who disbelieve will be driven onto Hell in troops till, when they arrive thereto, the portals thereof will be opened, and the keepers thereof will say Unto them: came there not Unto you apostles from amongst you, rehearsing Unto you the revelations of you Lord and warning you of the meeting of this your Day? They shall say: Yea, but the word of torment hath been justified on the Infidels.
It will be said: enter the portals Of Hell to be abiders therein. How ill, then, is the abode of the stiff-necked!
And those who feared their Lord Will be driven Unto the Garden in troops till, when they arrive thereto, and the portals thereof will be opened, the keepers thereof Will say Unto them: Peace be Unto you! excellent are ye! enter it as abiders.
And they Will say: all praise Unto Allah, who hath fulfilled His promise Unto us and made us inherit this land, so that we may dwell in the Garden whereever we will! Excellent then is the hire of the workers!
And thou wilt see the angels thronging round the Throne, hallowing the praise of their Lord. And judgment shall be given between them with truth: and it will be said: all praise Unto Allah, the Lord of the worlds.
