O ye mankind! fear your Lord; Who created you of a single soul and He created the reef the spouse thereof, and of the twain He spread abroad men manifold and women. And fear Allah by Whom ye importune one anot her, and the wombs. Verily Allah is ever over you a Watcher.
And give unto the orphans their substance, and substitute not the bad for the good; and devour not their substance by adding it to your substance; verily that is a great crime.
And if ye apprehend that ye may not deal justly with the orphan girls, then marry such as please you, of other Women, by twos and threes or fours, but if ye apprehend that ye shall not act justly, then marry one only, or that which your right hand own that Will be more fit, that ye may swerve not. their
And give unto women dowries as a gift, and if of themselves they give up aught thereof unto you, then eat it in pleasure and profit.
And give not unto the weak-witted the substance which Allah made a stay for you, but feed them there out, Sand clothe them, and say unto them a reputable saying.
And examine the orphans until they attain the age of wedlock, then if ye perceive in them and discretion, hand over unto them their substance, and consume it not extravagantly or hastily for fear that they may grow. And whosoever is rich, let him abstain, and whosoever is needy let him take thereof reputably. And when ye hand over their substance unto them, call in witnesses in their presence, and sufficeth Allah as a Reckoner.
Unto males shall be a portion of that which their parents and others near of kin may leave; and unto females shall be a portion of that which their parents and other near of kin may leave, whether it be small or large, a portion allotted.
And when those of kin are Present at the division and the orphans and the needy, provide for them thereout, and say unto them a reputable saying.
And let them beware who, should they leave behind them a weakly progeny, would be afraid on their account; let them, wherefore, fear Allah, and says a proper saying.
Verily those who devour the substance of the orphans wrongously, only devour the fire into their bellies, and anon they shall roast in the Blaze.
Allah enjoineth you in the matter of your children; the male will have as much as the portion of two females, but if they be females more than two, then they will have two-thirds of that which he hath left, and if only one, she will have a half; and as far as his parents, each of the twain shall have a sixth of that which he hath left if he have a child, but if he hath no child and his parents be his heirs, then his mother shall have a third; but if he have brothers, then his mother shall have a sixth: all after paying a bequest he may have bequeathed or a debt. Your fathers and your sons - ye know not which of them is higher unto you in benefit: an ordinance this from Allah, verily Allah is Knowing, Wise.
And ye will have half of that which your wives may leave, if they have no Child, but if they have a child then ye shall have one- fourth of that which they may leave, after paying a bequest they may have bequeathed or a debt. And they shall have one-fourth of that which ye may leaves if ye have no child; but if ye have a child then they will have one-eighth of that which ye may leave, after paying a bequest ye may have bequeathed or a debt. And if a man or a woman who leaveth the heritage hath no direct heirs but hath a brother or a sister, each of the twain will have a sixth; and if more than one, then they will have equal shares in one third after paying a bequest they may have bequeathed or a debt without prejudice: an ordinance this from Allah; and Allah Is Knowing, Forbearing.
These are the statutes of Allah, and whosoever obeyeth Allah and His apostle, him He shall cause to enter the Gardens whereunder rivers flow, as abiders therein; and that is an achievement mighty.
And whosoever disobeyeth Allah and His apostle, and transgresseth His statutes, him He shall cause to enter the Fire, as an abider therein; and unto him shall be a torment ignominous.
As for those of your women who may commit whoredom, call against them four witnesses from among them if they testify, confine you them to their houses till death complete their turn of life, or Allah appoint for them some other way.
And as for those twain of you who commit it, hurt them both; then, if they repent and amend, turn away from them; verily Allah is Relenting, Merciful.
With Allah is the repentance of those alone who do an evil foolishly and thereafter repent speedily, surely it is they unto whom Allah shall relent. And Allah is Knowing, Wise.
And repentance is not for those who go on working evil until when death presenteth itself unto one of them, and he saith: verily now I repent; nor for those who die while they are infidel. These! for them We have gotten ready a torment afflictive.
O Ye who believe! it is not allowed unto you that ye may heir the women forcibly; nor shut them up that ye may take away from them part of that which ye had given them, except when they be guilty of manifest enormity. And live with them reputably if ye detest them, belike ye detest a thing and yet Allah hath placed therein abundant good.
And if ye intend to replace a wife by anot her, and ye have given the one of them a talent, take not back aught therefrom. Would ye take it back by slander and manifest sin.
And how can ye take it back when one of you hath gone in unto the other, and they have obtained from you a rigid bond!
And wed not of women those whom your fathers had wedded, except that which hath already passed. Verily it hath been an indecency and an abomination and an evil way:
Forbidden unto you are your mothers and your daughters and your sisters and your father's sisters and your mother's sisters, and your brother's daughters and your sister's daughters. and your foster mothers and your foster sisters, and the mothers of your wives and your step-daughters, that are your wards, born of your wives unto whom ye have gone in, but if ye have not gone in unto them, no sin shall be on you, and the wives of your sons that are from your own loins, and, also that ye should have two sisters together, except that which hath already passed; verily Allah is ever Forgiving, Merciful.
And also forbidden are the wedded among women, save those whom your right hands own Allah's rescript for you. And allowed unto you is whatsoever is beyond that, so that ye may seek them with your substances as properly wedded men, not as fornicators. Then whomsoever of them ye have enjoyed, give them their dowers stipulated. And there will be no blame on you in regard to aught on which ye mutually agree after the stipulation; verily Allah is Knowing, Wise.
And whosoever of you has not ampleness of means that he may wed free believing women, let him wed such of the believing bondswomen as the right hands of you people own. And Allah noweth well your belief, ye are one from the other. O Ye may wed them then, with the leave of their owners, and give them their dowers reputably as properly wedded women, not as fornicateresses, nor as those taking to themselves secret paramours. And when they have been wedded, if they commit an indecency, on them the punishment shall be a moiety of that for free wedded women. This is for him among you, who dreameth perdition; and that ye should abstain is better for you, and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
Allah intendeth to expound unto you and to guide you into the dispensations of those before you and relent toward you. And Allah is Knowing, Wise.
And Allah intendeth to relent toward you, and those that follow lusts intend that ye shall incline a mighty inclining.
Allah intendeth that he shall lighten unto you, and man hath been created weak.
O Ye who believe! devour not your substance among yourselves unlawfully, but let it be a trading among you by mutual agreement. And slay not yourselves, verily Allah is unto you ever Merciful.
And whosoever doth that in transgression- and wrong, presently We shall roast him in Fire; and with Allah that is ever easy.
If ye shun the grievous sins from which ye are prohibited, We shall expiate from you your misdeeds, and make you enter a noble Entrance.
And long not for that wherewith Allah hath preferred one of you above anot her Unto men shall be the portion of that which they earn, and unto women shall be the portion of that which they earn. And ask Allah for some of His grace, verily Allah is of everything Knower.
And unto each We have appointed inheritors of that which the parents or the near of kin leave behind, and unto those with whom ye have made your pledges give their portion. Verily Allah is ever of everything a Witness.
Men are overseers over women, by reason of that wherewith Allah hath made one of them excel over anot her, and by reason of that which they expend of their substance. Wherefore righteous women are obedient, and are watchers in husbands absence by the aid and protection of Allah. And those wives whose refractoriness ye fear, exhort them, and avoid them in beds, and beat them; but if they obey you, seek not a way against them; verily Allah is ever Lofty, Grand.
And if ye fear a divergence between the twain, set up an arbiter from his household and an arbiter from her household; then if the twain desire rectification Allah shall bring harmony between the twain; verily Allah is ever Knowing, Aware.
And worship Allah and associate not aught with Him; and unto parents show kindness, and also unto kindred and orphans and the needy and the near neighbour and the distant neighbour and the companion by your side and the wayfarer and those whom your right hands own Verily Allah loveth not one who is vainglorious, boaster-
Those who are niggardly and command mankind to niggardliness and hide that which Allah hath vouchsafed unto them of His grace; and We, have gotten ready for the infidels a torment ignominous;
And those who expend of their substance for show of men, and believe not in Allah nor in the Last Day; and whosoever hath for him Satan as a companion, a vile companion hath he!
And what would befall them were they to believe in Allah and the Last Day and expend out of that wherewith Allah hath provided them? And of them Allah is ever the Knower.
Verily Allah wrongeth not any one a grain's weight, and if there is a virtue He shall multiply it and give from His presence a mighty hire.
How will it be then, when We shall bring, out of each community, a witness, and We shall bring thee against these as a witness?
That Day those who had disbelieved and disobeyed the apostle would fain that the earth would be levelled over them, and from Allah they will not be able to hide any discourse.
O Ye who believe! approach not prayer while ye are intoxicated until ye know that which ye say, nor yet while ye are polluted, save when ye be way faring, until ye have washed your selves. And if ye be ailing or on a journey, or one of you cometh from the privy have touched women, or ye and ye find not water, then betake your selves to clean earth and wipe your faces and your hands therewith; verily Allah is ever Pardoning, Forgiving.
Observest thou not those unto whom was vouchsafed a portion of the book purchasing error, and desiring that ye would err as regards the way!
And Allah is Knower of your enemies. Sufficieth Allah as a Friend and sufficieth Allah as a Helper.
Of those who are Judaised, are they who pervert Words from their meanings and say: We hear and we disobey, and: hear thou without being made to hear, and RA'INA, twisting their tongues and scoffing at the faith! And had they said: we hear and obey, and: hear thou, and: UNZURNA, it had surely been better for them and more upright. But Allah hath cursed them for their infidelity, wherefore they shall not believe, save a few.
O Ye who are vouchsafed the Book believe in that which We have sent down confirming that which is with you, ere We alter countenances and turn them into their hinder parts, or We might curse them even as We cursed the fellows of the Sabt; and Allah's command is ever fulfilled.
Verily Allah shall not Forgive that aught be associated with Him, and He will forgive all else unto whomsoever He listeth. And whosoever associateth aught with Allah, he hath of a surety fabricated a mighty sin.
Hast thou not observed those who hold themselves purified Nay! Allah purifieth whomsoever He will, and they shall not be wronged a whit.
Behold how they fabricate a lie against Allah! and sufficeth that as a manifest sin.
Hast thou not observed those unto whom is vouchsafed a portion of the Book testifying to idols and devils, and saying of those who have disbelieved: these are better guided as regards the way than the believers?
These are they whom Allah hath cursed; and whomsoever Allah curseth, for him thou shalt not find a helper.
Is theirs a portion of the dominion? In that case, they would not give the people a speck.
Or envy they the people on account of that which Allah hath vouchsafed unto them out of His grace! so, surely We vouchsafed unto the house of Ibrahim the Book and the wisdom and We vouchsafed unto them a mighty dominion.
Then of them were some who believed therein, and of them were some who turned aside therefrom, and Hell -will suffice as a Flame.
Verily those who disbelieve in Our revelations, presently We shall roast them into Fire. So oft as their skins are cooked We shall change them for other skins, so that they may keep on tasting the torment verily Allah is ever Mighty, Wise.
And those who believe and work righteous works, anon We shall cause them to enter the Gardens whereunder rivers flow as abiders therein for ever. For them shall be spouses purified, and We shall cause them to enter a sheltering shade.
Verily Allah commandeth you that ye shall render dues unto the owners thereof, and that, when ye judge between men, judge with justice. Verily excel lent is that wherewith Allah exhorteth you verily Allah is ever Hearing, Beholding.
O Ye who believe! obey Allah and obey the apostle and owners of authority from amongst you. then if dispute in aught refer it Unto ye Allah and the apostle if ye indeed believe in Allah and the Last Day. That is the best and fairest interpretation.
Hast thou not observed those who assert that they believe in that which hath been sent down unto thee and that which hath been sent down before thee desiring to go to the devil for judgement, whereas they have been commanded to disbelieve in him; and Satan desireth to lead them far astray.
And when it said unto them come unto that which Allah hath sent down and unto the apostle, thou wilt see the hypocrites hang back far from thee.
How then, when some ill befalleth them because of that which their hands have sent forth and then they come to thee swearing by Allah: we meant naught save kindness and concord.
These are they of whom Allah knoweth whatsoever is in their hearts: wherefore turn thou from them and exhort them, and say unto them for their souls, effectual saying.
And not an apostle We have sent but to be obeyed by Allah's command. And if they, when they had wronged their souls, had come unto thee and begged forgiveness of Allah, and the apostle had begged forgiveness for them they would surely have found Allah Relentant, Merciful.
Aye! by thy Lord, they shall not believe until they have made thee judge of that which is disputed among them, and then find no vexation in their hearts with that which thou hast decreed, and they submit with full submission.
And had We prescribed unto them: slay yourselves or go forth from your dwellings, they had not done it, save a few of them. And did they do that which they are exhorted to do, it would be for them better and more strengthening.
And then We would surely have vouchsafed unto them from Our presence a mighty hire.
And We would surely have guided them on the right path.
And whosoever obeyeth Allah and the apostle, then those shall be with them whom Allah hath blessed --from among the prophets, the saints, the martyrs, and the righteous. Excellent are these as a company!
That is the grace from Allah, and sufficeth Allah as Knower!
O Ye who believe! take your precaution then sally forth in detachment or sally forth all together.
And verily there Is among you he who laggeth behind, and if an ill befalleth you, he saith: surely Allah hath bestowed favour on me in that I was not Present with them.
And if there betideth you grace from Allah, then, as though there had been no tenderness between you and him, he saith: would that I had been with them! then I would have achieved a mighty achievement.
Let them wherefore fight in the way of Allah those who have purchased the life of this world for the Hereafter: And whosoever fighteth in the way of Allah, and is then slain or overcometh, We shall vouchsafe unto him a mighty hire.
And what aileth you that ye fight not in the way of Allah and for the oppressed among men and women and Children who say: our Lord! take US forth from this town whereof the people are Wrong-doing, and appoint us from before Thee a patron, and appoint us from before Thee a helper!
These who believe fight in the way of Allah and those who disbelieve fight in the way of the devil. Fight then against the friends of Satan; verily the craft of Satan is ever feeble.
Hast thou not observed those unto whom it was said;. withhold your hands, and establish prayer and give the poor-rate; but when thereafter fighting was prescribed unto them, lo! there is a party of them dreading men as with the dread of Allah, or with greater dread; and they say: our Lord! why hast Thou prescribed unto us fighting! Wouldst that Thou hadst let us tarry a term nearby! Say thou: the enjoyment of the world is little, and the Hereafter is better for him who feareth God; and ye shall not be wronged a whit.
Wheresoever ye may be, death shall overtake you, even though ye be in fortresses plastered. And if there betideth them some good, they say: this is from God. And if there betideth them some ill, they say: this is because of thee. Say thou: everything is from Allah. What aileth then this people, that well-nigh they understand not any speech
Whatsoever of good betideth thee is from Allah, and whatsoever of ill betideth thee is because of thy self. And We have sent thee unto the mankind as an apostle; and sufficieth Allah as a Witness.
Whosoever obeyeth the apostle hath indeed obeyed Allah, and whosoever turnoth away -We have not sent thee over them as a keeper.
And they say: Obedience. Then when they so forth from before thee, a part of them plan together by night other than they had said: and Allah writeth down that which they plan by night. Wherefore turn thou from them and trust in Allah and sufficeth Allah as a Trustee.
Ponder then they not on the Qur'an? Were it from other than Allah they would surely find therein many a contradiction.
And when there cometh unto them aught of security aught of alarm, they bruit it; abroad: whereas had they referred it to the apostle and those in authority among them, then those of them who can think it out would have known it. And had there not been Allah's grace upon you and His mercy, ye would surely have followed Satan, save a few.
Fight thou therefore in the way of Allah thou are not tasked except for thy own soul, and persuade the believers; belike Allah will withhold the violence of those who disbelieve. And Allah is stronger in violence and Stronger in chastising.
Whosoever intercedeth with a goodly intercession, his shall be a portion therefrom, and whosoever intercedeth with an ill intercession his shall be a responsibility thereof; and Allah is of everything the Controller.
And when ye are greeted with a greeting, then greet back with one better than that or return that; verily Allah is of everything the Reckoner.
Allah! there is no god but he. Surely He shall gather you together on the Day of Resurrecticn, whereof there is no doubt; and who is more truthful than Allah in discourse?
What aileth you then, that ye are two parties regarding the hypocrites? whereas Allah hath reverted them because of that which they have earned. Would ye lead aright those whom Allah hath sent astray? And whomsoever Allah sendeth astray, for him thou shalt not find a way.
Fain would they that ye disbelieved even as they have disbelieved, so that ye may be all alike. Wherefore take not friends from among them until they migrate for the sake of Allah; and if they turn away, then lay hold of them and slay them, wheresoever ye find them, and take not from among them a friend or a helper.
Excepting those who join a people between whom and you there is a bond or who come to you with their breasts straitened that they should fight you or fight their own people. And had Allah so willed, He would have surely set them upon you. If then they withdraw from you, and fight not against you and offer you peace, then Allah openoth not for you against them a way.
Surely ye will find others desiring, that they may be secure from you and may be secure from their people; and yet so oft as they are brought back into the temptation, they revert thereto. Wherefore if they withdraw not from you, nor offer you peace, nor restrain their hands, lay hold of them and slay them wheresoever ye find them. These: against them We have given you a clear warranty.
It is not for a believer to slay a believer except by a mischance; and whosoever slayeth a believer by mischance on him is the setting free of a believing bondman and blood-wit to be delivered to his family except that they forego. Then if he be of a people hostile unto you and is himself a believer, then the setting free of a believing bondman; and if he be of a people between man whom and you is a bond, then the bloodwit to be delivered to his family and the setting free of a believing bondman. Then whosoever findeth not the wherewithal, on him is the fasting for two months in succession: a penance from Allah. And Allah is ever Knowing, Wise.
And whosoever slayeth a believer intentionally, His meed is Hell, as an abider therein; and Allah shall be wroth with him and shall curse him, and shall get ready for him a torment terrible.
O Ye who believe! when ye march forth in the way of Allah, make things clear and say not unto one who giveth you a salutation: thou art none of a believer, seeking the perishable goods of the life of the world; for with Allah are spoils abundant. Even Thus were ye aforetime, then Allah favoured you. So make things clear; verily Allah is of that which ye work ever Aware.
Not equal are the holders back among the believers, save those who are disabled, and the strivers in the way of Allah with their- riches and their lives. Allah hath preferred in rank the strivers with their riches and their lives above the holders-back, and unto all Allah hath promised good. And Allah hath preferred the strivers above the holdersback with a mighty hire.
Ranks from Him and forgiveness and mercy; and Allah is ever Forgiving, Merciful.
Verily unto those whom the angels carry off in death, while they are yet oppressors of their souls, they will say: what were ye in? They will say: Weakened were we in the land. They Will say: was not Allah's land wide so that ye could migrate thereto. These: their resort is hell an evil retreat! -
Excepting the weak ones among men, women and children, unable to find a stratagem and not guided to a way.
These: belike Allah will pardon them, and Allah is ever Pardoning, Forgiving.
And whosoever migrateth in the way of Allah, shall find in the earth plentiful refuge and ampleness; and whosoever goes forth from his house as a fugitive unto Allah and His apostle, and death then overtaketh him his hire hath surely devolved upon Allah, and Allah is ever Forgiving, Merciful.
And when ye are journeying in the earth there shall be no fault in you that ye shorten the prayer if ye fear that those who disbelieve shall molest you, verily the infidels are ever unto you an avowed enemy.
And when thou art amidst them and hast set up the prayer for them, then let a party of them stand with thee and let them retain their arms; then when they have prostrated themselves, let them go behind you, and let anot her party who have not yet prayed, come and pray with thee; and let them also take their caution and their arms. Pain would those who disbelieve that ye neglected your arms and your baggage, so that they might swoop down upon you at one swoop. And there shall be no fault in you, if there be an injury to you from rain or ye are ailing, that ye lay down your arms and yet take your caution. Verily Allah hath gotten ready for the infidels a torment ignominious.
Then when ye have finished the prayer, remember Allah, standing and sitting and lying on Your sides. Then when ye are secure, establish the prayer verily the prayer is prescribed unto the believers at definite times.
And slacken not in seeking the enemy people if ye are suffering, then they suffer even as ye suffer, and you hope from Allah that which they hope not; and Allah is ever Knowing, Wise.
Verily We! We have sent down the Book unto thee With truth that thou mightest judge between people by that which Allah hath shewn thee; and be not thou On behalf of the deceivers a pleader.
And beg thou forgiveness of verily Allah is ever Forgiving.
And contend thou not for those who defraud their souls verily Allah loveth not one who is a defrauder, sinner.
They feel ashamed of men and feel not ashamed of Allah, whereas He is Present with them when by night they plan together of discourse which pleaseth Him not; and Allah is of that which they work ever an Encompasser.
Lo! it is ye who have contended for them in the life of the world; then who will contend for them with Allah on the Day of Resurrection, or who shall be their champion?
And whosoever worketh an ill or wrongeth his own soul, and thereafter beggeth forgiveness of Allah shall find Allah Forgiving, Merciful.
And whosoever earnoth a sin, only against his own soul he earnoth it; and Allah is ever Knowing, Wise.
And whosoever earnoth a vice or a sin, and thereafter casteth it on an innocent, he hath surely borne a calumny and a manifest sin.
Were not the grace of Allah on thee and His mercy, a party of them had surely resolved to mislead thee; whereas they mislead not but themselves, and they shall not hurt thee in aught. And Allah hath sent down unto thee the Book and wisdom, and hath taught thee that which thou knowest not; and the grace of Allah on thee is ever mighty.
No good is there in much of their whispers except in his who commandeth charity or kindness or reconciliation among mankind; and whosoever doeth this seeking the good-will of Allah, We shall presently give him a mighty hire.
And whosoever opposeth the apostle after the truth hath become manifest unto him, and followeth other way than that of the believers, We shall let him follow that to which he hath turned, and shall roast him in Hell - an evil retreat!
Verily Allah shall not forgive that aught be associated with Him, and He will forgive all else unto whomsoever He liketh; and whosoever associateth ought with Allah, hath surely strayed away a far straying.
They invoke beside Him but females, and they invoke not but a Satan rebellious.
Allah hath accursed him. And he said: surely shall take of Thine bondmen a portion allotted.
And surely I will lead them and will fill them with vain desires, and I will command them so that they will slit the ears of the cattle, and I will command them so that they will alter the creation of Allah. And whosoever taketh Satan for a patron, instead of Allah, shall surely suffer a manifest loss.
The Satan maketh them promises and filleth them with vain desires. and Satan promiseth them not but delusion.
These: their resort shall be Hell, and they shall not find therefrom an escape.
And those who believe and work righteous works, anon We shall make them enter Gardens whereunder the rivers flow, as abiders therein for ever: promise of Allah, true. And who is more truthful than Allah in speech?
Not by your vain desires nor by the vain desires of the people of the Book; whosoever worketh an evil, shall be requited therewith, and he will not find beside Allah a patron nor a helper.
And whosoever worketh of righteous works, male or female, and is a believer, these shall enter the Garden and shall not be wronged a speck.
And who can be better in religion than he who submitteth his countenance unto Allah, and sincere, and followeth the faith of Ibrahim, the upright And Allah took Ibrahim for a friend.
And Allah's is whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth; and of everything Allah is ever an Encompasser.
And they ask thy decree concerning women. Say thou: Allah decreeth unto you concerning them and so do the revelations that have been rehearsed unto you in the Book concerning the orphan women unto whom yes give not that which is prescribed for them and yet desire that ye shall wed them, and concerning the oppressed children, and concerning this, that ye shall deal with the orphans in equity, and whatsoever of good ye de, then verily thereof Allah is ever Aware.
And if a woman feareth from her husband refractoriness or estrangement, it shall be no blame on the twain if they effect between them a reconciliation; and reconciliation is better. And souls are engrained with greed. And if ye act kindly and fear Him, then verily Allah is ever of that which ye work Aware.
And ye are not able to deal evenly between the wives, even though ye long to do so, but incline not an extreme inclining so that ye may leave her as one ahanging. And if ye effect a reconciliation and fear Allah, then Allah is ever Forgiving, Merciful.
And if the twain must sunder, Allah shall render the twain independent out of His bounty, and Allah is ever Bountiful, Wise.
Allah's is whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth. And assuredly We enjoined those who were vouchsafed the Book before you and yourselves: fear Allah, and if ye disbelieve then Allah's is whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth; and Allah is ever Self-Sufficient, Praiseworthy.
And Allah's is whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth, and sufficeth Allah as a Champion.
If He will, He will take you away, O mankind! and bring forward others; and over that Allah is ever Potent.
Whosoever seeketh the reward of this world, with Allah is the reward of this world and of the Hereafter; and Allah is ever Hearing, Beholding.
O Ye who believe! be ye maintainers of justice, bearers of testimony for Allah's sake, though it be against yourselves or your parents or kindred. Be he rich or poor, Allah is nigher unto either wherefore follow not the passion, lest ye deviate. If ye incline or turn away, then verily of that which ye work Allah is ever Aware.
O Ye who believe believe in Allah's and His apostle and the Book He hath sent down unto His apostle and the Book He sent down aforetime; and whosoever disbelieveth in Allah and His angels and His Books and His Apostles and the Last Day, hath surely strayed away a far straying.
Verily those who believed and then disbelieved, and then believed and then, disbelieved, and thereafter waxed in infidelity ye Allah shall not forgive them nor guide them on the way.
Announce thou to the hypocrites that theirs shall be a torment afflictive.
Those who take infidels for, friends, instead of the believers. Seek thy honour with them verily then honour is Allah's altogether.
And it hath been revealed to you in the Book that when ye hear Allah's revelations being disbelieved in and mocked at, sit not down with them until they plunge in a discourse other than that; for, then, ye would surely become like unto them. Verily Allah is about to gather hypocrites and infidels in Hell together.
Those who wait about you. If then there be victory for you from Allah, they say: were we not with you? And if there is a portion for the infidels, they say: gained we not mastery over you, and kept we not you back from the believers! Allah shall Judge betwixt you On the Day of Judgement, and Allah shall not make for the infidels against the believers a way.
Verily the hypocrites would beguile Allah, whereas it is He who beguileth them,; and when they stand up to prayer, they stand up languidly, making a show to the people, and they remember not Allah but little.
Wave ring between this and that; neither for this nor for that and whomsoever Allah sendeth astray, for him thou wilt never find a way.
O Ye who believe! take not infidels for friends, instead of believers. Would ye give Allah against you a manifest warranty!
Verily the hypocrites shall be in the lowest abyss of the Fire; and thou wilt not find for them a helper.
Except those who shall yet repent and amend and hold fast by repent Allah and make their religion exclusive for Allah. These then shall be with the believers, and presently Allah shall give the believers a mighty hire.
What will Allah do with your torment, if ye return thanks and believe? And Allah is ever Appreciative, Knowing.
Allah approveth not the publishment of evil speech, unless by one who hath been wronged; and Allah is ever Hearing, Knowing.
Whether ye disclose a good or conceal it, or pardon an evil, then verily Allah is ever Pardoning potent.
Verily those who disbelieve in Allah and His apostles, and would differentiate between Allah, and His apostles, and say: some we believe in and others we deny; and they would take a way in between this and that.
These: they are the infidels in very truth, and We have gotten ready for the infidels a torment ignominious.
And those who believe in Allah and His apostles and differentiate not between any of them, anon We shall give them their hire; and Allah is ever Forgiving, Merciful.
The people of the Book ask thee to bring down a Book to them from the heaven. But surely they asked Musa a thing greater than that; they said: shew us God manifestly; whencefore the thunderbolt overtook them for their wrong-doing. Then they took a calf after there had come unto them the evidences. Even so We pardoned that, and We gave Musa a manifest authority.
And We raised the Mount over them for their bond. And We said unto them: enter the portal prostrating yourselves. And We said unto them: transgress not in the matter of the Sabbath and We took from them a firm bond.
Accursed are they then for their breach of the bond and their rejecting the commandments of Allah and their slaying the prophets without justification, and their saying: our hearts are uncircumcised. Aye! Allah hath set a seal upon them for their infidelity, wherefore they believe not but a little.
And for their blasphemy and for their speaking against Maryam a mighty calumny.
And for their saying: verily We have slain the Messiah 'Isa son of Maryam, an apostle of Allah, whereas they slew him not, nor they crucified him but it was made dubious unto them. And verily those who differ therein are in doubt thereof, they have no knowledge thereof; they but follow an opinion; and surely they slew him not.
But Allah raised him unto Himself; and Allah is ever Mighty, Wise.
And there is none among the people of the Book but shall surely believe in him before his death, and on the Day of Judgement he shall be a witness against them.
Wherefore because of the wrongdoing on the part of those who are Judaised We forbade unto them the clean things that had been allowed unto them, and also because of their keeping away many from Allah's way;
And also because of their taking usury whereas they were prohibited therefrom, and also because of their devouring the riches of men unlawfully. And for the infidels among them We have gotten ready a torment afflictive.
But of them those well-grounded in the Knowledge and the believers believe in that which hath been sent down unto thee and that which hath been sent down before thee, and the establishers of prayer and the givers of the poor-rate and the believers in Allah and the Last Day- those: unto them anon We shall give a mighty hire.
Verily We have revealed unto thee even as We revealed unto Nuh and the prophets after him, and as We revealed unto Ibrahim and Isma'il and Is-haq and Ya'qub and the tribes, and 'Isa and Ayyub and Yunus and Harun and Sulaiman, and unto Daud We vouchsafed a Scripture.
And We Revealed unto apostles of some of whom We have narrated unto thee aforetime and of others of whom We have not narrated unto thee; and unto Musa Allah spake directly.
We sent all these apostles as bearers of glad tidings and warners in order that there be no plea for mankind against Allah, after the apostle; and Allah is ever Mighty Wise.
How be it Allah beareth witness by that which He hath sent down unto thee He sent it down with His own knowledge and the angels also bear witness; and sufficieth Allah as a Witness.
Verily those who disbelieve and keep others from the way of Allah, have surely strayed far away.
Verily those who have disbelieved and done wrong, Allah is not one to forgive them nor to guide them to any way.
Except the way to Hell, as abiders therein for ever, and this unto Allah is ever easy.
O ye mankind! assuredly there hath come unto you the Prophet with the truth from your Lord wherefore believe that it may be well for you. And if ye disbelieve, then verily Allah's is whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth; and Allah is ever Knowing, Wise.
O ye people of the Book; exceed not the bounds in Your religion, and say not of Allah save that which is the truth. The Messiah 'Isa, son of Maryam, is but an apostle of Allah and His word --He cast it upon Maryam-- and a spirit from Him. Believe wherefore in Allah and His apostles, and say not: three. Desist, that it may be well for you. Allah is but the One God: hallowed be He that there should be unto Him a son! His is whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth, and sufficeth Allah as a Trustee.
The Messiah disdaineth not that he should be a bondman of Allah, nor do the angels brought near. And whosoever disdaineth serving Him and stiff-necked, anon He shall gather them all unto Him.
Then as to those who have believed and worked righteous works, He shall give unto them their hire in full and shall give unto them an increase out of His grace. And as to those who disdained and were stiff-necked, He shall torment them with a torment afflictive. And they shall not find for themselves, against Allah, a protecting friend or a helper.
O ye mankind! there surely hath come unto you a proof from your Lord, and We have sent down unto you a manifest light.
Then as to those who believe in Allah and hold fast by Him, anon He shall make them enter into a mercy from Himself and grace and shall lead them unto Himself by a path straight.
They ask thee for pronouncement. Say thou: Allah pronounceth thus in the matter of one without father or child: if a person perisheth and hath no child, but hath a sister, hers shall be the half of that which he hath left: and he shall be her heir if she hath no child, if there be two sisters, then theirs shall be two-third of that which he hath left; and if there be both brothers and sisters, then male shall have as much as the portion of two females. Allah expoundeth unto you, lest ye err; and Allah is of everything Knower.
