Ha. Mim.
By the luminious Book.
Verily We have sent it down on a blessed night, verily We were to become warners.
Therein is decreed every affair of wisdom
As a command from before Us. Verily We were to become senders:
A mercy from thy Lord. Verily He! He is the Hearer, the Knower.
Lord of the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is in- between the twain, if only ye would be convinced.
There is no god but He. He quickeneth and causeth to die: your Lord and Lord of your forefathers.
Aye! they're in doubt sporting.
So wait thou day whereon the heaven will bring forth a manifest smoke:
Covering the people's this shall be a torment afflictive.
Our Lord! remove from us the torment, verily we shall become believers.
How can there be an admonition Unto them, when surely there came Unto them an apostle manifest!
Yet they turned away from him and said: one tutored, one distraced.
Verily We shall remove the torment for a while; but verily ye shall revert.
On the Day whereon We assault them with the greatest assault, verily We shall take vengeance.
And assuredly afore them We proved Fir'awn's people, and there came Unto them an apostle honoured.
Saying: restore to me the bondmen of Allah, verily I am Unto you an apostle trusted.
And saying exalt not yourselves against Allah; verily I have come Unto you with an authority manifest.
And verily I have sought refuge in my Lord and your Lord lest ye stone me.
And if ye will not believe in me, then let me alone.
Then he called upon his Lord. these are a people guilty.
So depart thou with My bondmen by night; verily ye shall be pursued.
And leave thou the sea divided: verily they are a host to be drowned.
They left - how many! - of gardens and springs.
And cornfields and goodly positions.
And the delights which they had been enjoying!
Even so And We caused to inherit them another people.
And the heavens and the earth wept not over them, nor were they respited.
And assuredly We delivered the Children of Isra'il from an ignominous torment
From Fir'awn; verily he was haughty and of the extravagant.
And assuredly We elected them with knowledge above the worlds.
And We vouchsafed Unto them signs wherein was a manifest favour.
Verily these! they say:
There is naught but our first death, and we shall not be raised again.
Bring then our fathers if ye say so.
Are they better Or the people of Tubba and those afore them? We destroyed them; verily they were culprits.
And We created not the heavens and the earth and all that is in-between the twain sporting.
We created them not save with a purpose but most of them know not.
Verily the Day of Distinction is the term appointed for all of them.
A Day whereon a friend shall not avail a friend at all, nor shall they be helped.
Save those on whom Allah will have mercy. Verily He! He is the Mighty, the Merciful.
Verily the tree of Zaqqum:
Food of the sinner.
Like the dregs of all! It shall seethe in the bellies:
As the seething of boiling water.
Lay hold of him, and drag him Unto the midst of the Flaming Fire.
Then pour upon his head the torment of balling water.
Taste thou! thou art indeed mighty, honoured!
Verily this is that whereof ye were wont to doubt.
Verily the God-fearing will be in a place secure
Amidst gardens and springs.
Attired in fine silk and brocade, facing each other.
Even so. And We shall pair them with fair damsels large- eyed.
They will call therein for every kind of fruit in security.
They will not taste death therein, except the first death; and He will preserve them from the torment of the Flaming Fire.
A bounty from thy Lord. That! that is the supreme achievement.
And We have made it easy in thy language; they might haply be admonished.
Wait thou then; verily they also are waiting.
