Ha. Mim.
The revelation of the Book is from Allah, the Mighty, the Wise.
We created not the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is in-between the twain save with truth, and for a term stated. And those who disbelieve are from that whereof they are warned backsliders.
Say thou: bethink ye: whatsoever ye call upon beside Allah- show me whatsoever they have created of the earth? Or have they any partnership in the heavens? Bring me a Book before this, Or some trace of knowledges if ye say sooth.
And who is more astray than he who calleth beside Allah, Unto such as will answer it not till the Day of Resurrection and who are of their call unaware.
And when mankind will be gathered they will become Unto them enemies and of their worship they will become deniers.
And when Our manifest revelations are rehearsed Unto them those who disbelieve say of the truth when it hath come to them: this is magic manifest.
Say they: he hath fabricated it. Say thou: if I have fabricated it, then ye cannot avail me against Allah in aught. He is the Knower of that which ye utter thereof; He sufficeth as a witness between me and you; and He is Forgiving, Merciful.
Say thou: I am not an innovator among the apostles, nor I know whatsoever shall be done with me or with you; I only follow that which is revealed Unto me, and am but a warner manifest.
Say thou: bethink ye: if it is from Allah while ye disbelieve therein and a witness from the Children of Isra'il beareth witness to the like thereof and believeth, while ye are still stiff necked, then who is further astray than you? Verily Allah guideth not a wrong-doing people.
And those who disbelieve say of those who believe: had it been good, they would not have preceded us thereto. And when they have not let themselves be guided thereby, they say: this is an ancient falsehood.
And before it there hath been the Book of Musa, a guide and a mercy. And this a Book confirming it, in Arabic speech, that it may warn those who have done wrong and as glad tidings Unto the well-doers.
Verily those who say: our Lord is Allah, and thereafter stand fast thereto, no fear shall come upon them, nor shall they grieve.
Those are the fellows of the Carden: abiders therein: a recompense for that which they have been working.
And We have enjoined upon man kindness Unto the parents: with hardship his mother beareth him and with hardship she bringeth him forth, and the bearing of him and the weaning of him is thirty months, until, when he attaineth his full strength and attaineth the age of forty years, he saith: my Lord! grant me that may give thanks for the favour wherewith. Thou hast favoured me and my parents and that may work righteously such as Thou mayest approve; and be Thou good Unto me in my progeny, verily have turned Unto Thee repentant, and verily I am of those who submit.
Those are they from whom We shall accept the best of that which they have worked, and their misdeeds We shall pass by: among the fellows of the Garden: a true promise this, which they have been promised.
And he who saith Unto his parents: fie upon you both! threaten me ye that I shall be taken forth, whereas generations have passed away before me? and the twain implore Allah's assistance woe Unto thee! come to believe! verily the promise of Allah is true; yet he saith: naught is this but fables of the ancients."
Those are they upon whom hath been justified the saying about the communities of the Jinn and mankind who have passed away before them; verily they are ever the losers.
And for each are ranks according to that which they have worked, that He may repay them in full for their works; and they shall not be wronged.
And on the Day whereon those who disbelieve shall be placed before the Fire: ye made away with your good things in your life of the world, and ye enjoyed yourselves therewith so Today ye shall be requited with the torment of ignominy, for that ye have been growing stiff-necked on the earth without justification, and for that ye have been transgressing.
And remember thou the brother of the Aad when We warned his people in the sandhills - and surely there have passed away warners before him and after him - saying: worship none save Allah, verily I fear for you the torment of a mighty Day.
They said: art thou come Unto us that thou mayest turn us aside from our gods? then bring thou upon us that wherewith thou threatenest us, if thou art of the truth-tellers.
He said: the knowledge is only with Allah, and I preach Unto you that wherewith I have been sent, but I see you are a people given to ignorance.
Then when they beheld it as an overpeering cloud tending toward their valleys they said: yonder is an overpeering cloud bringing us rain. Nay it is that which ye sought to be hastened: a wind wherein is a torment afflictive.
It shall annihilate everything by the command of its Lord. Wherefore they became such that naught could be seen save their dwellings Thus We requite a nation of the culprits.
And assuredly We had established them in that flourishing condition wherein We have not established you, and We had appointed for them hearing and sight and hearts; yet their hearing and sight and heart availed them not at all, they became wont to gainsay the revelations of Allah, and surrounded them that whereat they had been mocking.
And assuredly We have destroyed the cities round about you. and We have variously propounded our signs, that haply they might return.
Then wherefore succoured them not those whom they had taken for gods beside Allah, as a means of approach? Aye! they failed them. And that was their lie, that which they had been fabricating.
And recall what time We turned towards thee a company Of the Jinns hearkening Unto the Qur'an. So when they came in the presence thereof they said: give ear. Then when it was ended, they turned back to their people as warners.
They said: O our people! verily we have hearkened Unto a Book sent down after Musa, confirming that which was before it, guiding Unto the truth and a straight path.
O our people! answer Allah's summoner and believe in him; He shall forgive you your sins and shall shelter you from a torment afflictive.
And whosoever answereth not Allah's summoner, he cannot frustrate His vengeAnce on the earth, and for him there will be, beside Him, no patrons. Those are in error manifest.
Bethink they not that Allah Who created the heavens and the earth and was not fatigued with the creation thereof, is able to quicken the dead? Aye! verily He is over everything Potent.
And on the Day whereon those who disbelieve will be placed before the Fire: is this not real? They will say: yea, by our Lord. He will say: taste wherefore the torment, for ye have been disbelieving.
Bear thou then with patience even as the apostles, endued with resolution bear with patience, and seek not to hasten on for them. On the Day whereon they will behold that wherewith they are threatened, it will seem to them as though they had tarried but an hour of the day. A proclamation this: so none will be destroyed save the nation of transgressors.
