Those who disbelieve and hinder others from the way of Allah, He shall send their works astray.
And those who believe and work righteous works and believe in that which hath been revealed Unto Muhammad -and it is the truth from their Lord- He shall expiate their misdeeds from them and shall make good their state.
That is because those who disbelieve follow the falsehood, and those who believe follow the truth from their Lord. And thus Allah propoundeth Unto mankind their similitude.
Now when ye meet those who disbelieve, smite their necks until when ye have slain them greatly, then make fast the bonds; then, thereafter let them off either freely or by ransom, until the war layeth down the burthens thereof. That ye shall do. And had Allah willed, He would have vindicated Himself against them, but He ordained fighting in order that He may prove you one by the other. And those who are slain in the way of Allah, He shall not send their works astray.
Anon He shall guide them, and shall make good their state.
And He shall make them enter the Garden; He shall have made it known, Unto them.
O ye who believe! if ye and shall succour Allah, He shall succour you make firm your feet.
And those who disbelieve, downfall shall be theirs, and He shall send astray their Works.
That is because they detest that which Allah hath sent down, and so He shall make of non-effect their works.
Have they not travelled then on the earth so that they might see how hath been the end of those before them! Allah annihilated them. And for the infidels theirs shall be the like fate therefore.
That is because Allah is the patron of those who believe, and because the infidels! no patron is theirs.
Verily Allah shall cause those who believe and work righteous works to enter Gardens whereunder rivers flow. And those who disbelieve enjoy themselves and eat even as the cattle eat, and the Fire shall be the abode for them.
And many a city, mightier In strength than the city which drave thee forth, We destroyed them, and there was no helper of theirs.
Is he then who standeth, on an evidence from his Lord like Unto him whose evil of work is made fair-seeming for him and those who follow their lusts?
A likeness of the Garden which hath been promised to the God-fearing: therein are rivers of water incorruptible, and rivers of milk whereof the flavour changeth not, and rivers of wine: a joy Unto the drinkers; and rivers of honey clarified. theirs therein shall be every kind of fruit, and forgiveness from their Lord. ShAll Persons enjoying such bliss be like Unto those who are abiders in the Fire and are given to drink boiling water so that it mangleth their entrails?
Of them are some who listen to thee, until, when they go forth from before thee, they say Unto those who have been vouchsafed knowledge, what is that he hath said just now? Those are they whose hearts Allah hath sealed up and they follow their lusts.
And those who are guided He increaseth Unto them guidance, and giveth them their piety.
Await they but the Hour, that it should come upon them on a sudden? Tokens thereof are already come, so how shall it be with them when there cometh Unto them their admonition!
So know thou that there is no god save Allah, and ask forgiveness for thy fault and for believing men and believing women. And Allah knoweth well your moving about and your place of rest.
And those who believe say wherefore hath not a Surah been revealed? Then when there is sent down a Surah firmly constructed, and fighting is mentioned therein, thou seest those in whose hearts is a disease looking at thee with the look of one swooning Unto death. So also for them!
Their obedience and speech are known. Then when the affair is determined, if even then they gave credence Unto Allah, it would have been better for them.
Then, belike ye are, if ye turn to cause corruption in the earth away, and to sever your kinship.
Those are they whom Allah hath cursed, and then hath deafened them and blinded their sights.
Ponder then they not on the Qur'an, or are on the hearts locks thereof?
Verily those who have apostated on their backs after the guidance had become manifest Unto them, the devil hath embellished this apostacy for them and hath given them false hopes.
That is because they said Unto those who detest that which Allah hath revealed: we shall obey you in part of the affair; and Allah knoweth their talking in secret.
How then shall it be when the angels shall take them away at death smiting their faces and their backs!
That is because they followed that which angered Allah and detested His good-will; so He made their works of non-effect.
Deem those in whose hearts is a disease that Allah will never bring to light their secret malevolence?
And if We willed, We would surely shew them Unto thee, so that thou shouldst surely know them by their marks. And thou shalt surely know them by the mode of their speech. And Allah knoweth your works.
And of a surety We shall prove you all until We know the strivers among you and the steadfast, and We shall prove your states.
Verily those who have disbelieved and have hindered others from the way of Allah and have opposed the apostle after the guidance had become manifest Unto them, shall not hurt Allah at all, and anon He shall render their works of non effect.
Ye who believe! obey Allah and obey the apostle, and render not Your works vain.
Verily those who disbelieve and hinder others from the way of Allah and then die as infidels, Allah shall by no means forgive them.
Wherefore faint not, nor cry out for peace; and ye shall be triumphant. And Allah is with you, and He will not defraud you of your works.
The life of the world is but a sport and a pastime. And if ye believe and fear, He will give you your hire, and will not require of you your substance.
If He required it of you and importuned you, ye would be niggardly, and He will bring to light your secret malevolence.
Behold! ye are those who are called to expend in the way of Allah, then there are of you some who are niggardly. And whosoever is niggardly is niggardly only to himself. And Allah is Self-sufficient, and ye are the needy. And if ye turn away, He will substitute for you another people, and then they will not be the likes of you.
