Qaf. By the Qur'an glorious, We have sent thee as a warner.
Aye! they marvel that there hath come Unto them a warner from among themselves; so the infidels Say: this is a thing wondrous!
Shell We be brought back when we are dead and have become dust? That is a return remote!
Surely We know that which the earth consumeth of them, and with Us is, Book preserved.
Aye! they belie the truth when it cometh Unto them; wherefore they are in an affair confused.
Have they not looked up to the heaven above them, in what wise We have constructed and bedecked it, and that therein is no rift?
And the earth! We have spread it forth, and have cast therein firm mountains, and have caused to grow therein of every beauteous kind of plants:
An insight and an admonition for every bondman penitent.
And We have sent down from the heaven water brest wherewith We have caused gardens to grow and the grain reaped.
And tall date-palms laden with clusters ranged.
As a provision for our bondmen; and therewith We have quickened a dead land. Even so will be the coming forth.
And before them the people of Nuh belied, and so did the dwellers Of Rass and the Thamud.
And the A-ad, and Fir'awn. and the brethren of Lut.
And the dwellers in the wood, and the people of Tubba. Each one belied the apostles, wherefore fulfilled was My judgement.
Are We then wearied with the first creation? Aye! they are in dubiety regarding a new creation.
And assuredly We have created man and We know whatsoever his soul whispereth Unto him, and We are nigher Unto him than his jugular vein.
Behold! when the two receivers receive-one on the right hand and one on the left a sitter.
Not a word he uttereth but there is with him a watcher ready.
And the stupor of death will come in truth: this is that which thou hast been shunning.
And the trumpet will be blown: this is the Day of the Threatening.
And there shall come every soul therewith shall be a driver and a witness.
Assuredly thou wast in neglect thereof; now We have removed from off thee thy veil, so thy sight Today is piercing.
And his companion will say: this is that which with me is ready.
Cast ye twain into Hell every Person rebellious, contumacious.
Hinderer o fgood, trespasser, doubter
Who set up with Allah another god. So cast him ye twain into the torment severe.
His companion will say: O our Lord! caused him not to transgress but he was himself in error far off.
Allah will say: wrangle not in My presence, and had already proferred Unto you the threat.
The Word will not be changed in My presence, nor am an oppressor at all Unto My bondmen.
Mention the Day whereon We shall say Unto the Hell: art thou filled? and it will say: is there yet any addition?
And brought nigh will be the Garden Unto the God-fearing, not far-off.
This is that which ye were promised: for every oft- returning heedful one.
That feareth the Compassionate in the unseen and cometh to Him with a heart penitent:
Enter it in peace. This is the Day of Abidence.
Theirs therein will be whatsoever they list; and with Us will be yet more.
And how many a generation have We destroyed before them, who were mightier in power than they, and they traversed the cities! No place of refuge could they find.
Verily herein is an admonition Unto him who hath a heart, or giveth ear while he is heedful.
And assuredly We created the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is in between the twain in six days, and there touched Us naught of weariness.
So bear thou patiently with that which they say, and hallow the praise of thine Lord before the rising of the sun and before its setting.
And in the night-time hallow Him, and also after the prescribed prostration.
And hearken thou: the Day whereon the caller will call from a place quite near.
The Day whereon they will surely hear the shout - that is the Day of coming forth.
Verily We! it is We Who give life and cause death, and Unto Us is the journeying.
That shall be the Day whereon the earth will be cleft from off them as they hasten forth. That shall be a gathering Unto Us easy.
We are the best Knower of that which they say, and thou art not over them over them tyrant. Wherefore admonish thou by the Qur'an him who feareth My threat.
