The Hour hath drawn nigh, and the moon hath been rent in sunder.. And if they behold a sign, they turn away and say: magic continuous.
And if they behold a sign, they turn away and say: "magic continous"
And they belied, and they followed their lusts; and every affair cometh to a final goal.
And assuredly there hath come Unto them tidings wherein is a deterrent.
Wisdom consummate. But warnings avail not.
Wherefore withdrew thou from them. The Day whereon the sum- moner Will summon mankind Unto a thing unpleasant.
With looks downcast they will come forth, from the tombs, as though they were locusts scattered abroad.
Hastening toward the summoner. The infidels will say: this is a day diffrcult.
There belied before them the people of Nuh. So they belied Our bondman Nuh and said: `a madman;' and moreover he was reproven.
Thereupon he prayed Unto his Lord: verily am overcome, so vindicate me.
Then We opened the portals of heaven with water poured out.
And We made the earth break forth with springs; SO that the water met for an affair already decreed.
And We bare him on a thing of planks and nails.
Moving forward under Our eyes: a requital for him who had been rejected.
And assuredly We left it for a sign. Is there then anyone who would be admonished?
So how dreadful have been My torment and My warning!
And assuredly We have made the Qur'an easy for admonition; is there then any one who would be admonished?
And there belied the 'A-ad; so how dreadful have been My torment and warning!
Verily We! We sent against them a raging Wind On a day of calamity continuous.
Carrying men away as though they were trunks of palm-trees uprooted.
So how dreodful have been My torment and My warning.
And assuredly We have made the Qur'an easy for admonition; is therethen any one who would be admonished!
And the Thamud belied the warnings.
And they said: a mere humanbeing from amongst us, and single! shall we follow him! verily then we should fall in error and madness.
Hath the Admonition been laid upon him from amongst us! Aye! he is a liar insolent.
They shall know tomorrow whichsoever is a liar insolent.
Verify We are sending the she-camel as a test for them, so watch them thou and have patience.
And declare thou Unto them that water hath been divided between them; every drinking shall be by turns.
Then they called their fellow, and he took the sword and hamstrung her,
So how dreadful have been My torment and My warnings.
Verily We We sent upon them one shout, and they became as the stubble of a fold-builder.
And assuredly We have made the Qur'an eary for admanirion: is there then any one who would be admonished.
The people of Lut belied the warnings.
Verily We! We sent upon them a gravel-storm save the household of Lut; them We delivered at early dawn.
As a favour from us. Thus We recompense him who giveth thanks.
And assuredly he had warned them of Our grasp, but: they doubted the warnings.
And assuredly they solicited him for his guests: then We wiped out their eyes: taste then My torment and My warnings.
And assuredly there met them early in the morning a torment settled.
Taste then My torment and My warnings.
And assuredly We have made the Qur'an easy for admonition; is there then any one who would be admonished.
And assuredly Unto the household of Fir'awn came the warning.
They belied Our signs everyone thereof; whereof We laid hold of them with the grip of our Mighty, Powerful.
Are your infidels better than these? Or is there an immunity for you in the Writs?
Or is it that they say: we are a multitude prevailing!
Anon will their multitude be vanquished, and they will turn the back.
Aye! the Hour is their appointed term, and the Hour shall be far more grievous and far more bitter.
Verily the culprits shall be in great error and madness.
On the Day whereon they shall be dragged into the Fire upon their faces, it shall be said Unto them: taste the touch of the Scorching.
Veriiy everything! We have created it by a measure.
And Our commandment shall be but one, as the twinkling of an eye.
And assuredly We have destroyed your likes; so is there any one who shall be admonished?
And everything they have wrought is in the Writs.
And everything, small and great, hath been written down.
Verily the God-fearing will be in Gardens and among rivers.
In a good seat, near a Sovereign Omnipotent.
