Whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth halloweth Allah, and He is the Mighty, the Wise.
He it is that drave forth those of the people of the Book who disbelieved from their homes at the first gathering, Ye imagined no that they would go -forth; and they imagined that their fortresses would protect them against Allah. Wherefore Allah came upon them whence they reckoned not, and cast terror in their hearts so that they made their houses desolate with their own hands and the hands of the believers. So learn a lesson. O ye endued with insight!
And had not Allahg prescribed banishment for them, surely He would have tormented them in the world; and theirs in the Hereafter is the torment of the Fire.
That is because they opposed Allah and His apostle, and whosoever opposeth Allah, then verily Allah is Stern in chastisement.
Whatsoever fine palms ye cut down or left standing on roots there of, it was by the leave of Allah, and in order that He might abase the transgressors.
And as to that which Allah restored Unto His apostle from them, ye rushed neither horse nor camel upon it but Allah giveth His apostles mastery over whomsoever He will. And Allah Is -over everything potent.
Whatsoever Allah may restore Unto His apostle from the people of the cities is due Unto Allah and Unto the apostle and Unto the near of kin and the orphans and the needy and the wayfarer, so that it may not be confined to the rich among you. And whatsoever the apostle giveth you, take; and whatsoever he forbiddeth you, refrain from. And fear Allah; verily Allah is Stern in chastisement.
And it is due Unto the poor Muhajirs who have been driven forth from their homes and their substance, seeking grace from Allah and His goodwill and succouring Allah and His apostle. These! they are the truthful.
And it is also due Unto those who are settled in the dwelling and the faith before them, loving those who have migrated Unto them, and finding in their breasts no desire for that which hath been given them, and preferring them above themselves even though there was want amongst them. And whosoever is Preserved from covetousness of his soul, then those! - they are the blissful.
And it is also due Unto those who came after them, saying: 'Our Lord! forgive us and our brethren who have preceded us in the faith, and place not in our hearts any rancour toward those who had believed. Our Lord! verily Thou art Tender, Merciful.'
Beholdest thou not: those who dissemble saying Unto their brethren who disbelieve among the people of the Book: if ye are driven forth we shall surely go forth with you, and we, shall not ever obey anyone in your respect, and if ye are attacked, we shall surely succour you. And Allah beareth witness that surely they are liars.
Surely if they are driven forth, they shall not; go forth with them, and surely if they are attacked, they shall succour them, not, and even ifs they succoured them they would turn their backs; and then they shall not be succoured.
Surely ye are more awful in their breasts than Allah. That is because they are a people who understand not.
They shall not fight against you, not even together, except in fenced townships or from behind walls. Their violence among themselves is strong; thou deemest them enjoined, whereas their hearts are diverse. That is because they are a people who reflect not.
They are like those a little before them; they tasted the ill-effect of their affair, and theirs shall be a torment afflictive.
They are like the Satan, when he saith Unto man: 'disbelieve,' then, when he disbelieveth, saith: verily I am quit of thee, verily I fear Allah, the Lord of the Worlds.
Wherefore the end of the twain will be that they will be in the Fire, as abiders there in; that is the meed of the wrong-doers.
O ye who believe! fear Allah, and let every soul look to that which it sendeth forward for the morrow. And fear Allah; veril Allah is Aware of that which ye work.
And be not as those who forgot Allah, wherefore He caused them to forget their own souls. Those! they are the transgressors.
Not equal are the fellows of the Fire and the fellows of the Garden. Fellows of the Garden! they are the achievers!
Had We sent down this Qur'an upon a mountain, thou wouldst surely have seen it humbling itself and cleaving in sunder for fear of Allah. Such similitudes We propound Unto mankind that haply they may reflect.
He is Allah, there is no God but He; Knower of the unseen and the seen. He is the Compassionate, the Merciful.
He is Allah, there is no God but He, the Sovereign, the Holy, the Author of Safety, the Giver of Peace, the Protector, the Mighty, the Mender, the Majestic. Hallowed be Allah from all that they associate!
He is Allah, the Creator, the Maker, the Fashioner; His are the excellent names. Him halloweth whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth, and He is the Mighty, the Wise.
