Whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth halloweth Allah. His is the dominion; and His is the praise; and He is over everything potent.
He it is Who hath created you; then of you some are Infidels and of you some are believers; and Allah is of that which ye Work Beholder.
He hath created the heavens and the earth with truth, and hath formed you, and hath made-your forms goodly; and Unto Him Is the return.
He knoweth whatsoever is In the heavens and the earth, and He knoweth whatsoever ye keep secret, and whatsoever ye make known; and Allah is the Knower of whatsoever is in the breasts.
Hath not the tidings reached you of those who disbelieved aforetime, and so tasted the evil consequence of their affair, and theirs will be a torment afflictive?
That was because their apostles were wont to come Unto them with evidences, but they said: shall a mere human bein guide us? Wherefore they disbelieved and turned away; and Allah needed them not. And Allah is Self Sufficient, Praiseworthy.
Those who dlsbelieve assert that they shall not be raised. Say thou 'Yea! by my Lord, ye shall surely be raised, and then Unto you shall be declared that which ye have worked; and that is for Allah easy.
Wherefore believe in Allah and His apostle and the Light which We have sent down: And Allah is of that which ye work Aware.
Remember the Day whereon He shall assemble you, the Day of Assembly; that shall be the Day of Mutual Loss and Gain. And whosoever believeth in Allah and worketh righteously from him He will expiate His misdeeds and will make him enter Gardens whereunder rivers flow, as abiders therein for evermore. That is the mighty achievement.
And they who disbelieve and belie Our Signs! those shall be fellows of the Fire, as abiders therein; a hapless destination.
No calamity befalleth save by Allah's leave. And whosoever believeth in Allah, his heart He guideth. And Allah is of everything Knower.
Obey Allah and obey the apostlle; then if ye turn away, on Our apostle is only the preaching manifest.
Allah! there is no God but He! In Allah, therefore, let the believers put their trust.
O ye who believe! verily of your wives and your children there is an enemy Unto you; wherefore beware of them. And if ye pardon and pass over and forgive, then verily Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
Your riches and your children are but a temptation; and Allah! with Him is a mighty hire.
Wherefore fear Allah as much as ye are able, and hearken and obey, and expend, for the benefit of your souls. And whosoever is protected from niggardliness of his soul - those! they are the blissful.
If ye lend Unto Allah a goodly loan, He will multiply it Unto you and will forgive you; and Allah is Appreciator, Forbearing.
Knower of the unseen and the seen, the Mighty, the Wise.
