Blest be He in whose hand is the dominion, and He is over everything Potent.
Who hath created death and life that He might prove you, as to which of you is excellent in work. And He is the Mighty, the Forgiver.
Who hath created seven heavens in storeys. Thou shalt not behold in the Compassionates creation any over-sight; then repeat thy look, beholdest thou any crack?
Then repeat thy look twice over, and thy look will return Unto thee dim and It will have become wearied out.
And assuredly We have bedecked the nearest heaven with lamps, and We have made them missiles for satans: and for them We have gotten ready the torment of the Blaze.
And for those who disbelieve in their Lord will be the torment of Hell; and a hapless destination!
When they will be cast thereinto, they will hear thereof a braying even as it balleth up,
Well-nigh it bursteth with rage. So oft as a company is cast thereinto, the keepers thereof will ask them: came there not Unto you a warner?
They will say: yea! surely there came a warner Unto us, but we belied, and said: God hath not sent down aught, are naught but in a great error.
And they will say: had we been wont to hearken or to reflect, we had not been among the fellows of the Blaze.
So they shall confess their sin. Far away they-be, the fellows of the Blaze!
Verily those who dread their Lord unseen, theirs shall be forgiveness and a great hire.
And whather ye keep your discourse secret or publish it, verily He is the Knower of that which is in the breasts.
Shall not He Who hath created know? And He is the Subtile, the Aware.
He it is Who hath made the earth Unto you subservient, so go forth in the regions thereof, and eat of His provision. And Unto Him is the Resurrection.
Are ye secure that He who is in the heaven will not sink the earth with you and then it should quake?
Or are ye secure that He Who is in the heaven will not send against you a whirlwind? Anon ye shall know what wise hath been My warning.
And assuredly those before them belied; then what wise hath been My wrath!
Behold they not the birds above them, outstretching their wings and they also withdraw them? Naught holdeth them except the Compassionate. Verily He is of everything Beholder.
Who. is he that can be an army Unto you and succour you, beside the Compassionate! The infidelsjb are but in delusion.
Who is he that can provide for you, should He withhold His provision? Aye! they persists in perverseness and aversion.
Is he, then, who goeth about grovelling upon his face better directed, or he who walketh evenly on a straight path?
Say thou: He it is who hath brought you forth and hath endowed you with hearing and sights and hearts. Little thanks it is ye give!
Say thou: He it is Who hath spread you over the earth, and Unto Him ye shall be gathered.
And they say: when will this promise be fulfilled, if ye say sooth?
Say thou: the knowledge is only with Allah, and but a warner manifest.
But when they will behold it proximating sad will be the countenances of those who disbelieve, and it will be said: this is that which ye have been calling for.
Say thou: bethink ye if Allah destroy me and those with me; or have mercy on us, who will protect the infidels from a torment afflictive?
Say thou: He is the Compassionate; in Him we have believed, and in Him we have put our trust. -And anon ye will know who it is that is in error manifest.
Say thou: bethink ye, were your water to be sunk away, who then could bring you water welling-up?
