The Inevitable Calamity!
What is the Inevitable Calamity?
And what shall make thee know that which the Inevitable Calamity is.
The tribes of Thamud and 'Aad belied the Striking Day.
As for Thamud, they were destroyed by the outburst.
And as for 'Aad they were destroyed by a wind, furious. roaring.
To which He subjected them for seven nights and eight days in succession, so that thou mightest have seen men during it lying prostrate, as though they were stumps of palms ruined.
Beholdest thou any of them remaining?
And Fir'awn and those before him and the overturned cities committed sin.
And they disobeyed their Lord's apostle, so He laid hold of them with a grip increasing.
Verily We! when the water rose, We bare you upon the traversing ark.
That We might make it Unto you an admonition, and thot it might be retained by the retaining ears.
And when the Trumpet shall sound a single blast.
And the earth and the mountains shall be borne and the twain shall be crushed with a single crash.
Then on that Day shall happen the Event.
And the heaven shall be rent in sunder, it on that Day shall be frail.
And the angels shall be on the borders thereof; and on that Day eight shall bear over them the Throne of thy Lord.
The Day whereon ye shall be mustered nothing hidden by you shall be hidden.
Then as to him who will be vouchsafed his book in his right hand, he shall say: here! read my book!
Verily I was sure that I should be a meeter of my reckoning.
Then he shall be in a life well-pleasing -
In a Garden lofty.
Clusters whereof shall be near at hand.
Eat and drink with benefit for that which ye sent on beforehand in dayspast.
Then as to him who shall be vouchsafed his book in his left hand, he shall say: Oh! would that I had not been vouchsafed my book.
Nor known whatever was my reckoning!
Oh, would that it had been the ending!
My riches have: availed me not;
There hath perished from me my authority.
Lay hold of him and chain him;
Then in the Scorch roast him
Then, in a chain whereof the length is seventy Cubits, bind him.
Verily he was wont not to believe in Allah, the Mighty.
Nor he urged on others the feeding of the poor.
Wherefore for him here this Day there is no friend.
Nor any food save filthy corruption.
None shall eat it but the sinners.
I swear by that which ye see.
And that which ye see not.
That it is surely the speech brought by messenger honourable.
And it is not the speech of a poet. Little it is that ye believe
Nor is it the speech of a sooth- sayer. Little are ye admonished.
It is a Revelation from the Lord of the worlds.
And if he had forged concerning us some discourses.
We surely had lain hold of him by the right hand.
And then severed his life-vein.
And not one of you would have withheld us from punishing him.
And verily it is an Admonition Unto the God-fearing.
And verily We! We know that some among you are beliers thereof.
And verily it shall be an occasion of anguish Unto the infidels.
And verily it is the truth of assured certainty.
Wherefore hallow thou the name of thy Lord, the Mighty.
