Verily We! We sent Nuh Unto his people saying: warn thy people ere there come Unto them torment afflictive.
He said: O my people! verily I am Unto you a warner manifest.
Worship Allah, and fear Him, and obey me.
He will forgive you your sins, and will defer you to an appointed term. Verily the term of Allah when it cometh shall not be deferred, if ye but knew.
He said: my Lord! verily have called my people night and day.
And my calling hath only increased them in fleeing.
And verily so oft as I call them, that Thou mayest forgive them, they place their fingers into their ears, and wrap themselves with their garments, and persist, and are stiff-necked.
Then verily have called Unto them publicly:
Then verily spake Unto them openly, and secretly also I addressed them.
And I said: ask forgiveness of your Lord; verily He is ever Most Forgiving.
He will send the heaven upon you copiously;
And He will add Unto you riches and children and will appoint Unto you gardens and will appoint Unto you rivers.
What aileth you that ye expect not in Allah majesty!
And surely He hath created you by stages.
Behold ye not in what wise Allah hath created seven heavens in storeys.
And hath placed the moon therein for a light, and hath made the sun a lamp?
And Allah hath caused you to grow from the earth as a growth.
And thereafter He will cause you to return thereinto, and He will bring you forth a forthbringing.
And Allah hath made the earth Unto you an expanse.
That of it ye may traverse the ways open.
Nuh said. my Lord! verily they have disobeyed me and followed them whose riches and children have only increased them in loss.
And who have plotted a tremendous plot
And who have said: ye shall not leave your gods; nor Shall ye leave Wadd nor Suwa', nor Yaghuth, nor Ya'uq nor Nasr.
And surely they have misled many. And increase Thou these wrong-doers in naught save error.
And because of their misdeeds they were drowned, and then they were made to enter a Fire. Then they found not for themselves, beside Allah, any helpers.
And Nuh said: my Lord! leave not upon the earth of the infidels one inhabitant.
Verily if Thou shouldst leave them, they Will mislead Thine bondmen and will beget not save sinning infidels,
My Lord! forgive me and my parents and him who entereth my house as a believer, and believing men and believing women, and increase not the wrong-doers in aught save ruin!
