Surely there hath come upon man a space of time when he was not a thing worth mentioning.
Verily We! We created man from a sperm of mixtures, that We might prove him, wherefore We made him hearing, seeing.
Verily We! We shewed him the way; then he becometh either thankful or ingrate.
Verily We! We have gotten ready for the infidels chains and collars and a Blaze.
Verily the pious shall drink of a cup whereof the admixture is like Unto camphor.
From a fountain whence the bondmen of Allah will drink, causing it to gush abundantly.
They fulfill their vow and dread a Day the evil whereof shall be widespreading.
And they feed with food, for love of Him, the needy, and the orphan and the captive.
Saying: we feed you only for the sake of Allah; we desire not from you any recompense or thanks.
Verily we dread from our Lord a Day grim and distressful.
Wherefore Allah shall preserve them from the evil of that Day, and shall cause them to meet brightness and joy.
And shall recompense them for that which they patiently bare with a Garden and silken garment.
Reclining therein upon couches, they shall behold therein neither sun nor hurting cold.
And close upon them will be the shades thereof, and low will hang the clusters thereof greatly.
And brought round amongst them will be vessels of silver and also goblets of glass.
Godblets of silver, they shall have filled them to exact measure.
And therein they shall be given to drink of a cup whereof the admixture will be ginger.
From a fountain therein, named Salsabil.
And there shall go round Unto them youths ever-young. When thou seest them thou wouldst deem them pearls unstrung.
And when thou lookest them thou shalt behold delight and a dominion magnificent.
Upon them shall be garments of fine green silk and of brocades. And adorned they shall be with bracelets of silver: and their Lord shall give them drink a beverage pure.
Verily this is for you by way of recompense, and your endeavour hath been accepted.
Verily We! it is We Who have revealed Unto thee the Qur'an, a gradual revelation.
Wherefore persevere thou with the commandment of thy Lord, and obey not thou of them, any sinner or ingrate.
And remember thou the name of thy Lord in the morning and in the evening.
And during the night - worship Him; and hallow Him the livelong night.
Verily those love the Herein, and leave in front of them a heavy day.
It it We Who creared them and made them firm of make. And whenever We list, We can replace them with others like Unto them.
Verily this is an admonition; then whosoever Will, may choose a way Unto his Lord.
And ye will not, unless Allah willeth. Verily Allah is ever Knowing, Wise.'
He maketh whomsoever He listeth to enter His mercy. And the wrong-doers! for them He hath gotten ready a torment afflective.
