Of what ask they?
Of the mighty Announcement,
Concerning which they differ.
By no means! anon they shall know.
Again, by no means! anon they shall know.
Have We not made the earth an expanse.
And the mountains as stakes?
And We have created you in pairs.
And We have made your sleep as a rest.
And We have made the night a covering.
And We have made the day for seeking livelihood.
And We have builded over you seven strong heavens.
And We have set therein lamps glowing.
And We have sent down from the rain-clouds water plenteous.
So that We bring forth thereby corn and vegetation.
And gardens thick with trees.
Verily the Day of Decision is a time appointed.
It is a Day whereon the trumpet will be blown, and ye will come in multitudes.
And the heaven will have been opened, and it will have become doors.
And the mountains will have been removed away, and they will have become as mirage.
Verily the Hell is an ambuscade:
For the exorbitant a receptacle.
They will tarry therein for ages.
They will not taste therein cool or any drink.
Save scalding water and corruption.
Recompense fitted!
Verily they were wont not to look for a reckoning.
And they belied Our revelations with strong belying.
And everything We have recorded in a book.
Taste therefore. We shall not increase you in aught but torment.
Verily for the God-fearing is an achievement.
Gardens enclosed and vineyards,
And full-breasted maidens of equal age.
And a cup overflowing.
They will hear therein no babble nor falsehood:
A recompense from thy Lord-a gift sufficient -
From the Lord of the heavens and the earth and of whatsoever is in bet-ween them, the Compassionate with Whom they can demand not audience.
On the Day whereon the spirits and the angels will stand arrayed, they will not be able to speak save him whom the Compassionate giveth leave and who speaketh aright.
That is the Sure Day. Whosoever therefore willeth, let him betake Unto his Lord a resort.
Verily We! We have warned you of a torment nigh at hand, a Day whereon a man shall behold that which his hands have sent forth, and the infidel will say: would that I were dust!
