By the angels who drag forth vehemently.
By the angels who release with gentle release.
By the angels who glide swimmingiy,
And then they speed with foremost speed.
And then they manage the affair,
A Day shall come whereon the quaking will quake,
And there will follow it the next blast.
Hearts on that Day will be throbbing;
Their looks will be downcast.
They say: shall we indeed be restored to the first state,
When we have become bones decayed!
They say: that then shall be a losing return.
It will be only one scaring shout,
And lo! they all shall appear on the surface.
Hath there come Unto thee the story of Musa!
Recall what time his Lord called Unto him in the holy vale of Tuwa.
Saying:'go thou Unto Fir'awn; verily he hath waxen exorbitant.
Then say thou: 'wouldst thou to be purified?
Then shall guide thee Unto thy Lord so that thou shalt fear.
Then he shewed him the great sign.
Yet he belied and disobeyed.
Then he turned back striving.
Then he gathered and cried aloud,
And he said: I am Your Lord, most high.
Wherefore Allah laid hold of him with the punishment of the Hereafter and of the present.
Verily herein is lesson for him who feareth.
Are ye harder to create or the heaven which He hath builded?
He hath raised the height thereof and perfected it.
And He made dark its night, and brought forth its sunshine.
And the earth!- thereafter He stretched it out.
And he brought forth therefrom its water, and its pasture.
And the mountains! - He established them firm:
A provision for you and your cattle.
Then when the Grand Calamity shall come
The Day whereon man shall rember whatsoever he had striven for.
And the Scorch will be made apparent to any one who beholdeth.
Then as for him who waxed exorbitant,
And who chose the life of the world,
Verily the Scorch! that shall be his resort.
And as for him who dreaded standing before his Lord, and restrained his soul from lust,
Verily the Garden! -that shall be his resort.
They question thee of the Hour:'when will its arrival be?
Wherein art thou concerred with the declaration thereof!
Unto thy Lord is the Knowledge of the limit fixed therefor.
Thou art but a warner Unto him who feareth.
On the Day whereon they behold it, it will appear to them as though they had not tarried save an evening or the morn thereof.
