The people’s reckoning is near, whereas they are in neglect, turned away!
Whenever a new advice comes to them from their Lord, they do not listen to it except while playing.
Their hearts are involved in play; and the unjust secretly conferred, “What is he, except another a human like you?! So do you follow magic although you have perceived?”
And the Prophet said, “My Lord knows all that is spoken in the heavens and in the earth; and He only is the All Hearing, the All Knowing."
Rather they said, “These are confused dreams, but in fact he has fabricated it – but in fact he is a poet; so he must bring us some sign, like those who were sent before.”
There is not a township before them which did not believe which We have not destroyed; so will they believe?
And We did not send (Prophets) before you except men, to whom We sent divine revelations – therefore, O people, ask the people of knowledge if you do not know.
And We did not create them without bodies so they would not eat food – nor that they abide on earth forever.
We then fulfilled the promise to them, therefore rescued them and whomever We willed, and destroyed the transgressors.
We have indeed sent down towards you a Book, in which is your repute; so do you not have sense?
And many a township did We destroy, for they were unjust, and We created other nations after them.
And when they tasted Our punishment, they immediately started fleeing from it.
The angels said to them, “Do not flee and return to the comforts that were given to you and to your homes, perhaps you will be questioned.”
They cried, “Woe to us, we were indeed unjust!”
So they kept saying this until We made them cut off, extinguished.
And We have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, unnecessarily.
If We willed to choose a pastime, We could have chosen it from Ourselves – if We wanted to.
But in fact We hurl the truth upon falsehood, so it scatters its brains – thereupon it vanishes; and for you is the ruin due to the matters you fabricate.
And to Him only belong all those who are in the heavens and in the earth; and those with Him are not conceited towards worshipping Him, nor do they tire.
They say His Purity night and day, and do not slacken.
Have they appointed from the earth, Gods that create something?
If other than Allah, there were Gods* in the heavens and the earth, they would be destroyed; therefore Purity is to Allah, Owner of the Throne, from the matters that they fabricate. (* Which is not possible. ** The heavens and the earth.)
He is not questioned whatever He does, whereas they will all be questioned.
Or have they set up other Gods besides Allah? Say, “Bring your proof; this is the remembrance of those with me and those before me”; but in fact most of them do not know the Truth, so they turn away.
And We did not send any Noble Messenger before you, but We divinely revealed to him that, “There is no God except I (Allah), therefore worship Me alone.”
And they said, “The Most Gracious has chosen a son – Purity is to Him! In fact they are honourable bondmen.”
They do not speak before He has, and they act only at His command.
He knows what is before them and what is behind them, and they do not intercede except for him whom He likes, and they fear with awe of Him. (The Holy Prophets and virtuous people will be given the permission to intercede. Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him – will be the first to intercede.)
And the one among them who says, “I am a God beside Allah” – We shall reward him with hell; this is how We punish the unjust.
Did not the disbelievers observe that the heavens and the earth were together, so We parted them, and we made every living thing from water? So will they not accept faith?
And We have placed mountains as anchors in the earth so that it may not shake with them; and We kept wide roads in it, so that they may find guidance.
And We have made the sky a roof, protected; and they turn away from its signs.
And it is He Who created the night and the day, and the sun and the moon; each one floats in an orbit.
And before you, We did not appoint on earth a never-ending life for any human; will they, if you depart, become immortal?
Every living being must taste death; and We test you with harm and with good – a trial; and to Us only you have to return.
And when the disbelievers see you, they do not appoint you except as an object of mockery; “Is he the one who speaks ill of your Gods?”; whereas they deny the remembrance of the Most Gracious Himself!
Man has been created hasty; very soon I shall show you My signs, do not be impatient.
And they say, “When will this promise occur, if you are truthful?
If only the disbelievers realised the time when they will not be able to stop the fire from their faces and from their backs – and nor are they to be helped.
In fact it will suddenly come upon them, therefore shocking them, and they will not be able to repel it nor will they be given respite.
And indeed the Noble Messengers before you were mocked at, but their mockery ruined the mockers themselves.
Proclaim, “Who guards you night and day from the Most Gracious?” In fact they have turned away from the remembrance of their Lord.
Do they have some Gods who protect them from Us? Neither can they save themselves nor save their friends from Us.
But in fact We have given these (disbelievers) and their fathers a benefit to the extent that life became long for them; so do they not see that We are reducing the land from its borders? So will these be victorious?
Proclaim (O dear Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him) “I warn you only with the divine revelation; and the deaf do not hear the call when warned.”
And if a whiff of your Lord’s punishment were to touch them, they would certainly say, “Woe to us – we were indeed unjust!”
And We shall set up the scales of justice on the Day of Resurrection – therefore no soul will be wronged in the least; and if a thing is equal to a grain of mustard seed, We will bring it; and We are Sufficient to (take) account.
And indeed We gave Moosa and Haroon the Judgement* and a light and an advice for the pious. (* The Holy Book Taurat.)
Those who fear their Lord without seeing and who apprehend the Last Day.
This is a blessed remembrance, sent down by Us; so do you deny it?
And indeed We bestowed Ibrahim with guidance from the beginning, and We were Aware of him.
When he said to his father and his people, “What are these idols before whom you squat (worshipping)?”
They said, “We found our forefathers worshipping them.”
He said, “Indeed you all – you and your forefathers – were in open error.”
They said, “Have you brought the Truth to us, or are you just making fun?”
He said, “In fact, your Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth, the One Who created them; and I am of those who testify to it.”
“And, by oath of Allah, I shall seek to harm your idols after you have gone away and turned your backs.”
He shattered them all, except the biggest among them, that perhaps they may question it.
They said, “Who has done this to our Gods? He is indeed cruel!”
Some among them said, “We heard a youth speak ill of them – the one called Ibrahim.”
They said, “Therefore bring him in front of the people, perhaps they may testify.”
They said, “Did you do this to our Gods, O Ibrahim?”
Said he, “Rather, their chief may have done it; so question them, if they can speak.”
So they turned towards their own selves and (inwardly) said, “Indeed you yourselves are unjust.”
Again they were inverted upon their heads; saying, “You know well that these do not speak.”
He said, “What! You worship, instead of Allah, one that neither benefits you nor harms you?”
“Disgrace be upon you and all the idols whom you worship instead of Allah; so do you not have sense?”
They said, “Burn him and help your Gods, if you want to.”
We said, “O fire, become cool and peaceful upon Ibrahim.”
And they wished to cause him harm, so We made them the greatest of losers.
And We rescued him and Lut towards the land which We have blessed for the entire world.
And We bestowed him Ishaq, and Yaqub the grandson; and We made all of them worthy of Our proximity.
And We made them leaders who guide by Our command, and We sent them the divine revelation to do good deeds and to keep the prayer established and to give charity; and they used to worship Us.
And We gave Lut the kingdom and knowledge, and We rescued him from the township that committed vile deeds; indeed those evil people were disobedient.
And We admitted him into Our mercy; indeed he is among those who deserve Our proximity.
And before this when Nooh called Us – We therefore heard his prayer and rescued him and his household from the great calamity.
And We helped him against the people who denied Our signs; indeed they were evil people, We therefore drowned them all.
And remember Dawud and Sulaiman, when they were deciding the dispute of a field, when some people’s sheep had strayed into it at night; and We were Present at the time of their deciding.
And We explained the case to Sulaiman; and to both We gave the kingdom and knowledge; and subjected the hills to proclaim the Purity along with Dawud, and (also subjected) the birds; and these were Our works.
And We taught him to make a garment for you, to protect you from your hurt; so will you be thankful?
And We subjected the fast wind for Sulaiman, which moved by his command towards the land in which We have placed blessings; and We know everything.
And among the devils, were those who dived (in water) for him and did works other than this; and We had kept them restrained.
And remember Ayyub (Job), when he called his Lord that, “Hardship has afflicted me, and You are the Most Merciful of all those who have mercy.”
We therefore heard his prayer and removed the adversity that had afflicted him, and We gave him his family and in addition bestowed along with them a similar number, by mercy from Ourselves – and an advice for the people who worship.
And remember Ismail, and Idrees, and Zul-Kifl; they were all patiently enduring.
And We admitted them into Our mercy; indeed they are among those who deserve Our proximity.
And remember Zun-Noon,* when he left in anger, assuming that We would not restrict him – he therefore called out in the realms of darkness, saying, “There is no God except You, Purity is to You; I have indeed committed a lapse.” (* Prophet Yunus – peace and blessings upon him)
We therefore heard his prayer and rescued him from grief; and similarly We shall rescue the Muslims.
And remember Zakaria, when he prayed to his Lord, “O my Lord – do not leave me alone, and You are the Best Inheritor.
We therefore heard his prayer; and bestowed him Yahya, and cured his wife for him; indeed they used to hasten to perform good deeds, and pray to Us with hope and fear; and used to weep before Us.
And remember the woman who maintained her chastity, We therefore breathed Our Spirit into her and made her and her son a sign for the entire world.
Indeed this religion of yours, is one religion; and I am your Lord, therefore worship Me.
And others have shattered their works into pieces among themselves; all have to return to Us.
So whoever does some good deeds, and is a believer, then his efforts will not be ignored; and We are recording it.
And it is forbidden for any township which We have destroyed, that they may return. (Once the disbelievers face death, their return to earth is impossible.)
Till the time when Yajuj and Majuj are released, and they will be flowing down from every height.
And the True Promise has come near – thereupon the eyes of the disbelievers will become fixed, staring wide; saying “Woe to us – we were in neglect of this, but in fact we were unjust.”
“Indeed you* and all that you worship** besides Allah, are the fuel of hell; in it you must go.” (* All disbelievers ** Idols and disbelievers who claimed to be Gods. The Prophets like Eisa and Uzair who were worshipped are exempt from this, and so are Maryam, and trees and the moon etc.)
“Had these been Gods they would not go into hell; and they have to remain in it.”
They will bray in it and not be able to hear anything in it.
Indeed those to whom Our promise of goodness has been made, have been kept far away from hell.
And they will not hear its faintest sound; and they will forever abide in whatever their hearts desire.
The greatest fear will not aggrieve them, and the angels will welcome them; saying “This is your day, which you were promised.”
The day when We shall roll up the heavens as the recording angel rolls up the register of deeds; We shall make him similar to Our making him the first time; this is a promise upon Us; We certainly have to do it.
And indeed We wrote, after the reminder in the Zaboor that, “My virtuous bondmen will inherit the earth.”
This Qur’an is sufficient for people who are devout.
And We did not send you (O dear Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him) except as a mercy for the entire world. (Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him – is the Prophet towards all mankind.)
Proclaim, “It is divinely revealed to me that your God is the only One God – Allah; do you therefore become Muslims?”
Then if they turn away, proclaim, “I have proclaimed a war against you on equal terms; and what do I know whether the promise which is given to you, is close or far?”
“Indeed Allah knows whatever is said, and knows all what you conceal.”
“And what do I know – it may be a trial for you, and an enjoyment for a time.”
And the Prophet submitted, “My Lord – render the true judgement”; “And only the help of Our Lord, the Most Gracious, is sought against all what you fabricate.”
