Ta-Seen-Meem. (Alphabets of the Arabic language – Allah, and to whomever he reveals, know their precise meanings.)
These are verses of the clear Book.
Possibly you may risk your life (O dear Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him) by grieving, because they did not believe.
If We will, We can send down on them a sign from the sky so that their leaders would remain bowed before it.
And never does a new advice come to them from the Most Gracious, but they turn away from it.
Indeed they have denied, so now soon coming upon them are the tidings of what they used to scoff at.
Have they not seen the earth, that how many honourable pairs We have created in it?
Indeed in this is a sign; and most of them will not accept faith.
And indeed your Lord – indeed only He is the Almighty, the Most Merciful.
And (remember) when your Lord said to Moosa, “Go to the unjust people.”
“The nation of Firaun; will they not fear?”
He said, “My Lord, I fear that they will deny me.”
“I feel hesitant, and my tongue does not speak fast, therefore make Haroon also a Noble Messenger.”
“And they have an accusation against me, so I fear that they may kill me.”
He said, “Not like this (any more); both of you go with Our signs, We are with you, All Hearing.”
“Therefore approach Firaun then proclaim, ‘We both are Noble Messengers of the Lord Of The Creation.’
‘That you let the Descendants of Israel go with us.’”
Said Firaun, “Did we do not raise you amongst us, as a child? And you spent many years of your life among us!”
“And you committed the deed of yours that you committed, and you were ungrateful.”
Said Moosa, “I did that at a time when I was unaware of the consequences.” (In anger – See verse 28:15)
“I therefore went away from you as I feared you – so my Lord commanded me and appointed me as one of the Noble Messengers.”
“And is this some great reward for which you express favour upon me – that you have enslaved the Descendants of Israel?”
Said Firaun, “And what is the Lord Of The Creation?
Said Moosa, “Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them; if you believe.”
Said Firaun to those around him, “Are you not listening with attention?”
Said Moosa, “Your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers preceding you.”
Said Firaun, “This (Noble) Messenger of yours, who has been sent towards you, has no intelligence!”
He said, “The Lord of the East and the West and all that is between them; if you have sense.”
Said Firaun, “If you ascribe any one else as a God other than me, I will surely imprison you.”
Said Moosa, “Even if I bring to you something clear?”
Said Firaun, “Then bring it, if you are of the truthful.”
So Moosa put down his staff and it became a visible serpent.
And he drew forth his hand, thereupon it shone bright before the beholders.
Said Firaun to the court members around him, “He is indeed an expert magician.”
“He wishes to expel you out of your land by his magic; so what is your advice?”
They said, “Stop him and his brother, and send gatherers to the cities.”
“To bring to you every expert great magician.”
So the magicians were gathered at a set time on a day appointed.
And it was said to the people, “Have you (also) gathered?”
The people said, “Perhaps we may follow the magicians if they are victorious.”
So when the magicians came, they said to Firaun, “Will we get some reward if we are victorious?”
He said, “Yes, and you will then become close to me.”
Moosa said to them, “Cast whatever you intend to cast.”
So they threw down their ropes and their staves and exclaimed, “By the honour of Firaun, indeed victory is ours!”
Therefore Moosa put forth his staff – so it immediately began swallowing all their fabrications.
The magicians therefore fell down prostrate.
They said, “We have accepted faith in the Lord Of The Creation.”
“The Lord of Moosa and Haroon.”
Said Firaun, “You accepted faith in him before I permitted you! He is indeed your leader who taught you magic; so now you will come to know; I swear, I will certainly cut off your hands and your feet from alternate sides, and crucify all of you.”
They said, “No harm (in it), we will return to our Lord.”
“We hope that our Lord will forgive us our mistakes, as we are the first to believe.”
And We sent the divine revelation to Moosa that, “Journey along with My bondmen within the night, for you will be pursued.”
So Firaun sent gatherers into the cities.
They announced “These people are a small group.”
“And indeed they have angered all of us.”
“And indeed we are an alert army.”
We therefore got them out from the gardens and water springs.
And from treasures and nice houses.
So it was; and We made the Descendants of Israel its inheritors.
So the Firaun’s people followed them at sunrise.
And when the two groups saw each other, those with Moosa said, “They have caught us.”
Said Moosa, “Never! Indeed my Lord is with me, He will now show me the way.”
So We sent the divine revelation to Moosa that, “Strike the sea with your staff”; thereupon the sea parted; so each part was like a huge mountain.
And We brought the others close to that place.
And We saved Moosa and all those with him.
Then drowned the others.
Indeed in this is surely a sign, and most of them were not Muslims.
And indeed your Lord – only He is the Almighty, the Most Merciful.
And recite to them the news of Ibrahim.
When he said to his father and his people, “What do you worship?”
They said, “We worship idols, and we keep squatting in seclusion before them.”
He said, “Do they hear you when you call?”
“Or do they benefit you or harm you?”
They said, “In fact we found our forefathers doing likewise.”
He said, “Do you see these – (the idols) whom you worship?”
“You and your forefathers preceding you.”
“They are all my enemies, except the Lord Of The Creation.”
“The One Who created me, so He will guide me.”
“And the One Who feeds me and gives me to drink.”
“And when I fall ill, so it is He Who heals me.”
“And He will give me death, then resurrect me.”
“And the One Who, upon Whom I pin my hopes, will forgive me my mistakes on the Day of Judgement.”
“My Lord, bestow me the command and join me with those who deserve your proximity.”
“And give me proper fame among the succeeding generations.”
“And make me among the inheritors of the Gardens of serenity.”
“And forgive my father* – he is indeed astray.” (His paternal uncle)
“And do not disgrace me on the day when everyone will be raised.”
“The day when neither wealth will benefit nor will sons.”
“Except he who presented himself before Allah, with a sound* heart.” (Intact or unblemished.)
And Paradise will be brought close for the pious.
And hell will be revealed for the astray.
And it will be said to them, “Where are those whom you used to worship?”
“Instead of Allah? Will they help you or retaliate?”
So they and all the astray were flung into hell.
And all the armies of Iblis. (Satan)
And they will say, and they will be quarrelling in it:
“By oath of Allah, we were indeed in open error.”
“When we considered you equal to the Lord Of The Creation.”
“And none misled us but the guilty.”
“So now we do not have any intercessors.” (The believers shall have intercessors, the disbelievers none).
“Nor a caring friend.”
“So if only were we to go back, in order to become Muslims!”
Indeed in this is a sign; and most of them were not believers.
And indeed your Lord – only He is the Almighty, the Most Merciful.
The people of Nooh denied the Noble Messengers.
When their fellowman Nooh said to them, “Do you not fear?”
“I am indeed a trustworthy Noble Messenger of Allah to you.”
“Therefore fear Allah, and obey me.”
“And I do not ask from you any fee for it; my reward is only upon the Lord Of The Creation.”
“Therefore fear Allah, and obey me.”
They said, “Shall we believe in you, whereas the abject people are with you?”
He said, “What do I know what their deeds are?”
“Indeed their account is only upon my Lord, if you perceive.”
“And I will not repel the Muslims.”
“I am not but clearly a Herald of Warning.”
They said, “O Nooh, if you do not desist you will surely be stoned.”
He said, “My Lord, my people have denied me.”
“Therefore make a decisive judgement between me and them, and rescue me and the believers along with me.”
So We saved him and those with him in a laden ship.
Then after it, We drowned the rest.
Indeed in this is a sign; and most of them were not believers.
And indeed your Lord, only He is the Almighty, the Most Merciful.
(The tribe of) A’ad denied the Noble Messengers.
When their fellowman Hud said to them, “Do you not fear?”
“I am indeed a trustworthy Noble Messenger of Allah to you.”
“Therefore fear Allah and obey me.”
“And I do not ask from you any fee for it; my reward is only upon the Lord Of The Creation.”
“What! You build a structure on every height, to laugh at the passers-by?”
“And prefer strong palaces, that perhaps you may live for ever?”
“And when you apprehend someone, you seize him mercilessly?”
“Therefore fear Allah, and obey me.”
“Fear Him Who has aided you with the things you know.”
“He aided you with cattle and sons.”
“And with gardens and water-springs.”
“Indeed I fear upon you the punishment of a Great Day.”
They said, “It is the same for us, whether you advise us or not be of the preachers.”
“This is nothing but the tradition of former people.”
“And we will not be punished.”
In response they denied him – We therefore destroyed them; indeed in this is a sign; and most of them were not believers.
And indeed your Lord – only He is the Almighty, the Most Merciful.
The Thamud tribe denied the Noble Messengers.
When their fellowman Saleh said to them, “Do you not fear?”
“I am indeed a trustworthy Noble Messenger of Allah to you.”
“Therefore fear Allah and obey me.”
“And I do not ask from you any fee for it; my reward is only upon the Lord Of The Creation.”
“Will you be left peacefully in these favours over here?”
“In gardens and water springs?”
“And fields and palm-trees, with delicate tendrils?”
“And you carve out dwellings in the mountains, with skill?”
“Therefore fear Allah and obey me.”
“And do not follow those who exceed the limits.”
“Those who spread turmoil in the earth, and do no reform.”
They said, “You are under a magic spell.”
“You are just a human like us; therefore bring some sign if you are truthful.”
He said, “This is the she-camel – one day shall be her turn to drink, and on the other appointed day, shall be your turn.”
“And do not touch her with evil intentions for the punishment of the Great Day will seize you.”
So they hamstrung her, and in the morning could only regret.
The punishment therefore seized them; indeed in this is a sign; and most of them were not believers.
And indeed your Lord – only He is the Almighty, the Most Merciful.
The people of Lut denied the Noble Messengers.
When their fellowman Lut said to them, “Do you not fear?”
“I am indeed a trustworthy Noble Messenger of Allah to you.”
“Therefore fear Allah and obey me.”
“And I do not ask from you any fee for it; my reward is only upon the Lord Of The Creation.”
“What! Among all the creatures, you commit the immoral acts with men?”
“And leave the wives your Lord has created for you? In fact you are people who exceed the limits.”
They said, “O Lut, if you do not desist, you will be expelled.”
He said, “I am disgusted with your works.”
“My Lord, rescue me and my family from their deeds.”
We therefore rescued him and his entire family.
Except one old woman, who stayed behind.
We then destroyed the others.
And We showered a rain upon them; so what a wretched rain for those who were warned!
Indeed in this is a sign; and most of them were not Muslims.
And indeed your Lord – only He is the Almighty, the Most Merciful.
The People of the Woods denied the Noble Messengers.
When Shuaib said to all of them, “Do you not fear?”
“I am indeed a trustworthy Noble Messenger of Allah to you.”
“Therefore fear Allah and obey me.”
“And I do not ask from you any fee for it; my reward is only upon the Lord Of The Creation.”
“Measure in full, and do not be of those who reduce.”
“And weigh with a proper balance.”
“And do not give the people their goods diminished, and do not roam the earth causing turmoil.”
“And fear Him Who created you and the earlier creations.”
They said, “You are under a magic spell.”
“You are just a human like us, and indeed we consider you a liar.”
“Therefore cause a part of the sky to fall upon us, if you are of the truthful.”
He said, “My Lord is Well Aware of what you do.”
In response they denied him – therefore the punishment of the day of the tent* seized them; that was indeed a punishment of a Great Day. (The clouds formed a tent and rained fire upon them).
Indeed in this is a sign; and most of them were not Muslims.
And indeed your Lord – only He is the Almighty, the Most Merciful.
And indeed this Qur’an has been sent down by the Lord Of The Creation.
The Trustworthy Spirit brought it down. (Angel Jibreel – peace be upon him.)
Upon your heart, for you to convey warning.
In plain Arabic language.
And indeed it is mentioned in the earlier Books.
And was this not a sign for them, that the scholars of the Descendants of Israel may recognise this Prophet?
And had We sent it down upon a person other than an Arab,
In order that he read it to them, even then they would not have believed in it.
This is how We have made (the habit of) denying embedded in the hearts of the guilty.
They will not believe in it to the extent that they see the painful punishment.
So it will come upon them suddenly, whilst they will be unaware.
They will therefore say, “Will we get some respite?”
So do they wish to hasten Our punishment?
Therefore observe, that if We give them some comforts for some years, –
And then the promise that is given to them, does come upon them-
So of what benefit will be the comforts that they were using?
And never did We destroy a township which did not have Heralds of warning, –
To advise; and We never oppress.
And this Qur’an was not brought down by the devils.
They are unworthy of it, nor can they do it.
Indeed they have been banished from the place of hearing.
Therefore do not worship another deity along with Allah, for you will be punished.
And O dear Prophet (Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him), warn your closest relatives.
And spread your wing of mercy for the believers following you.
So if they do not obey you, then say, “Indeed I am unconcerned with what you do.”
And rely upon (Allah) the Almighty, the Most Merciful.
Who watches you when you stand up.
And watches your movements among those who prostrate in prayer.
Indeed only He is the All Hearing, the All Knowing.
Shall I inform you upon whom do the devils descend?
They descend on every great accuser, extreme sinner. (The magicians)
The devils convey upon them what they heard, but most of them are liars.
And the astray follow the poets.
Did you not see that they keep wandering in every valley?
And they speak what they do not do?
Except those who believed and did good deeds, and profusely remembered Allah, and took revenge after they had been wronged*; and soon the unjust will come to know upon which side they will be overturned**. (* The Muslim poets who praise Allah and the Prophet. ** The disbelievers will be punished.)
