Alif-Lam-Meem. (Alphabets of the Arabic language – Allah, and to whomever He reveals, know their precise meanings.)
These are verses of the wise Book.
Guidance and mercy for the righteous.
Those who keep the prayer established and pay the charity and accept faith in the Hereafter.
It is they who are on guidance from their Lord, and only they are the successful.
And some people buy words of play, in order to mislead from Allah’s path, without knowledge; and to make it an article of mockery; for them is a disgraceful punishment.
And when Our verses are recited to him he haughtily turns away as if he did not hear them – as if there is deafness in his ears; so give him the glad tidings of a painful punishment.
Indeed those who believed and did good deeds – for them are Gardens of serenity.
In which they will abide; it is a true promise of Allah; and only He is the Almighty, the Wise.
He created the heavens without any supports visible to you, and cast mountains as anchors into the earth so that it may not shake with you, and spread all kinds of beasts in it; and We sent down water from the sky so thereby grew all kinds of refined pairs in it.
Allah has created this – therefore show me what has been created by those other than Him; in fact the unjust are in open error.
And indeed We bestowed wisdom to Luqman (saying) that, “Be grateful to Allah”; and whoever is grateful, is grateful for his own good; and whoever is ungrateful – then indeed Allah is the Absolute, the Most Praiseworthy.
And remember when Luqman said to his son, and he used to advise him, “O my son! Never ascribe anything as a partner to Allah; indeed ascribing partners to Him is a tremendous injustice.”
And We ordained upon man concerning his parents; his mother bore him enduring weakness upon weakness, and his suckling is up to two years – therefore be thankful to Me and to your parents; finally towards Me is the return.
And if they force you, that you ascribe a partner to Me a thing concerning which you do not have knowledge – so do not obey them and support them well in the world; and follow the path of one who has inclined towards Me; then towards Me only is your return, and I shall tell you what you used to do.
“O my son! If the evil deed is equal to the weight of a mustard-seed, and even if it is in a rock, or in the heavens, or wherever in the earth, Allah will bring it forth; indeed Allah knows all the minutest things, the All Aware.”
“O my son! Keep the prayer established, and enjoin goodness and forbid from evil, and be patient upon the calamity that befalls you; indeed these are acts of great courage.”
“And do not contort your cheek while talking to anyone, nor boastfully walk upon the earth; indeed Allah does not like any boastful, haughty person.”
“And walk moderately and soften your voice; indeed the worst voice is the voice of the donkey.”
Did you not see that Allah has made all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth, subservient for you and bestowed His favours upon you in full, both visible and hidden? And some men argue regarding Allah, with neither knowledge, nor guidance, nor a clear Book!
And when it is said to them, “Follow what Allah has sent down”, they say, “On the contrary, we shall only follow that upon which we found our forefathers”; even if the devil was calling them to the punishment of hell?
Whoever submits his face to Allah and is righteous – so he has indeed grasped the firm knot; and towards Allah only is the culmination of all things.
And whoever disbelieves – then do not be aggrieved by his disbelief (O dear Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him); they have to return to Us, and We will inform them what they were doing; indeed Allah knows what lies within the hearts.
We shall give them some usage, then making them helpless take them towards a severe punishment.
And if you ask them, “Who created the heavens and the earth?” – they will surely answer, “Allah”; proclaim, “All Praise is to Allah”; in fact most of them do not know.
To Allah only belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and in the earth; indeed Allah only is the Absolute, the Most Praiseworthy.
And if all the trees in the earth were pens, and the seas were its ink, with seven more seas to back it up – the Words of Allah will not finish; indeed Allah is Almighty, Wise.
Creating you all and raising you from the dead are like that of one soul*; indeed Allah is All Hearing, All Knowing. (He can create you slowly or all at once).
O listener, did you not see that Allah brings the night in a part of the day and brings the day in a part of the night, and that He has subjected the sun and the moon – each one runs for its fixed term – and that Allah is Well Aware of your deeds?
This is because only Allah is the Truth, and all that they worship besides Him are falsehood, and because only Allah is the Supreme, the Great.
Did you not see that the ship sails on the sea by Allah’s grace, so that He may show you some of His signs? Indeed in this are signs for every greatly enduring, grateful person.
And if a wave comes upon them like mountains, they pray to Allah believing purely in Him; then when He brings them safely to land, some of them remain upon justice; and none will deny Our signs except an extremely unfaithful, ungrateful person.
O mankind! Fear your Lord, and fear the Day in which no father will benefit his child; nor will any good child be of any benefit to the father; indeed Allah’s promise is true; so never may the worldly life deceive you; and never may the great cheat deceive you in respect of Allah’s commands.
Indeed Allah has the knowledge of the Last Day! And He sends down the rain; and He knows all what is in the mothers’ wombs; and no soul knows what it will earn tomorrow; and no soul knows the place where it will die; indeed Allah is the All Knowing, the Informer. (He may reveal the knowledge to whomever He wills.)
