Alif-Lam-Meem. (Alphabets of the Arabic language – Allah and to whomever He reveals, know their precise meanings.)
The revelation of the Book is, without doubt, from the Lord Of The Creation.
What! They dare say that, “He has fabricated it”? In fact it is the Truth from your Lord, in order that you warn a nation towards whom no Herald of Warning came before you, in the hope of their attaining guidance.
It is Allah Who created the heavens and the earth, and all what is between them, in six days, then (befitting His Majesty) established Himself over the Throne (of control); leaving Allah, there is neither a friend nor an intercessor for you; so do you not ponder?
He plans (all) the job(s) from the heaven to the earth – then it will return to Him on the Day which amounts to a thousand years in your count.
This is the All Knowing – of all the hidden and the visible, the Most Honourable, the Most Merciful.
The One Who created all things excellent, and Who initiated the creation of man from clay.
Then kept his posterity with a part of an abject fluid.
Then made him proper and blew into him a spirit from Him, and bestowed ears and eyes and hearts to you; very little thanks do you offer!
And they said, “When we have mingled into the earth, will we be created again?”; in fact they disbelieve in the meeting with their Lord.
Proclaim, “The angel of death, who is appointed over you, causes you to die and then towards your Lord you will return.”
And if you see when the guilty will hang their heads before their Lord; “Our Lord! We have seen and heard, therefore send us back in order that we do good deeds – we are now convinced!”
And had We willed We would have given every soul its guidance, but My Word is decreed that I will certainly fill hell with these jinns and men, combined.
“Therefore taste the recompense of your forgetting the confronting of this day of yours; We have abandoned you – now taste the everlasting punishment, the recompense of your deeds!”
Only those believe in Our signs who, when they are reminded of them, fall down in prostration and proclaim the Purity of their Lord while praising Him, and are not conceited. (Command of prostration # 9).
Their sides stay detached from their beds and they pray to their Lord with fear and hope – and they spend from what We have bestowed upon them.
So no soul knows the comfort of the eyes that is kept hidden for them*; the reward of their deeds. (Paradise)
So will the believer ever be equal to the one who is lawless? They are not equal!
Those who accepted faith and did good deeds – for them are the Gardens of (everlasting) stay; a welcome in return for what they did.
And those who are lawless – their destination is the fire; whenever they wish to come out of it, they will be returned into it, and it will be said to them, “Taste the punishment of the fire you used to deny!”
And We shall indeed make them taste the smaller punishment before the greater punishment, so that they may return.
And who is more unjust than one who is preached to from the verses his Lord, then he turns away from them? We will indeed take revenge from the guilty.
And indeed We bestowed the Book to Moosa, therefore have no doubt in its acquisition, and made it a guidance for the Descendants of Israel.
And We made some leaders among them, guiding by Our command, when they had persevered; and they used to accept faith in Our signs.
Indeed your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection concerning the matters in which they used to differ.
And did they not obtain guidance by the fact that We did destroy many generations before them, so now they walk in their houses? Indeed in this are signs; so do they not heed?
And do they not see that We send the water to the barren land and produce crops with it, so their animals and they themselves eat from it? So do they not perceive?
And they say, “When will this decision take place, if you are truthful?”
Proclaim, “On the Day of Decision*, the disbelievers will not benefit from their accepting faith, nor will they get respite.” (* Of death or of resurrection)
Therefore turn away from them and wait – indeed they too have to wait.
