O Herald of the Hidden (the Prophet), continue to fear Allah and never listen to the disbelievers and the hypocrites; indeed Allah is All Knowing, Wise.
And keep following what is sent down to you from your Lord; O people! Indeed Allah is seeing your deeds.
And trust Allah; and Allah is Sufficient as a Trustee.
Allah has not kept two hearts in the body of any man; nor has He made them your mothers those wives of yours, whom you declare to be your mothers; nor has He made them your sons, whom you have adopted; this is the statement of your mouths; and Allah proclaims the truth and it is He Who shows the path.
Call them with their fathers’ names – this is more suitable in the sight of Allah; and if you do not know their fathers, then they are your brothers in the faith, (and your cousins as humans) and your friends; and there is no sin upon you for what you did unknowingly in the past – however it is a sin what you do with your heart’s intention; and Allah is Oft Forgiving, Most Merciful.
The Prophet is closer to the Muslims than their own lives, and his wives are their mothers; and the relatives are closer to each other in the Book of Allah, than other Muslims and immigrants, except that you may be kind towards your friends; this is written in the Book.
And remember O dear Prophet (Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him) when We took a covenant from the Prophets – and from you – and from Nooh, and Ibrahim, and Moosa, and Eisa the son of Maryam; and We took a firm covenant from them.
So that He may question the truthful regarding their truth; and He has kept prepared a painful punishment for the disbelievers.
O People who believe! Remember the favour of Allah upon you when some armies came against you, so We sent against them a windstorm and the armies you could not see; and Allah sees your deeds.
When the disbelievers came upon you from above you and from below you, and when the eyes became fixed in stare and the hearts came up to the throats, and you were imagining matters regarding Allah.
That proved be the testing ground for the Muslims, and they were subjected to a severe shake.
And when the hypocrites, and those in whose hearts is a disease, began saying, “Allah and His Noble Messenger have not given us a promise except one of deceit.”
And when a group among said, “O people of Medinah! This is no place of stay for you, therefore go back to your homes”; and a group among them sought exemption from the Prophet by saying, “Our homes are unprotected” whereas their homes were not unprotected; they willed nothing except to flee.
And if the armies had come upon them from the outskirts of Medinah and demanded disbelief from them, they would certainly have given them their demand and would not have hesitated in it except a little.
And indeed before this they had agreed with Allah that they would not turn their backs; and the covenant of Allah will be questioned about.
Proclaim, “Fleeing will never benefit you if you flee from death or killing, and even then you will not be given the usage of this world except a little.”
Say, “Who is he who can avert the command of Allah from you, if He wills harm for you or wills to have mercy upon you?” And other than Allah, they will not find any friend or supporter.
Indeed Allah knows those among you who prevent others from the holy war, and those who say to their brothers, “Come towards us”; and they do not come to fight, except a few.
They reduce the help towards you; so when a fearful time comes, you will observe them looking at you with eyes rolling like one enveloped by death; then when the time of fear is over, they begin slandering you with sharp tongues in their greed for the war booty; they have not accepted faith, therefore Allah has nullified their deeds; and this is easy for Allah.
They assume that the armies of the disbelievers have not gone away; and were the armies to come again, their wish would be to go out to the villages seeking information about you; and were they to stay among you even then they would not fight, except a few.
Indeed following the Noble Messenger of Allah is better for you – for one who is confident of Allah and the Last Day, and remembers Allah much.
And when the Muslims saw the armies, they said, “This is what Allah and His Noble Messenger promised us, and Allah and His Noble Messenger have spoken the truth”; and it did not increase anything for them but faith and acceptance of Allah’s will.
Among the Muslims are the men who have proved true what they had covenanted with Allah; so among them is one who has already fulfilled his vow, and among them is one still waiting; and they have not changed a bit.
In order that Allah may reward the truthful for their truthfulness, and punish the hypocrites if He wills, or give them repentance; indeed Allah is Oft Forgiving, Most Merciful.
And Allah turned back the disbelievers in their hearts’ jealousy, gaining no good; and Allah sufficed the Muslims in their fight; and Allah is Almighty, Most Honourable.
And He brought down from their forts, the People given the Book(s) who had supported them, and instilled awe into their hearts – you slay a group among them and another group you make captive.
And He bequeathed you their lands and their houses and their wealth, and land that you have not yet set foot upon; and Allah is Able to do all things.
O Herald of the Hidden! Say to your wives, “If you desire the worldly life and its adornment – therefore come, I shall give you wealth and a befitting release!”
“And if you desire Allah and His Noble Messenger and the abode of the Hereafter – then indeed Allah has kept prepared an immense reward for the virtuous among you.”
O the wives of the Prophet! If any among you dares to commit an act contrary to decency, for her will be double the punishment of others; and this is easy for Allah.
And whoever among you remains obedient towards Allah and His Noble Messenger and does good deeds – We shall give her double the reward of others, and have kept prepared for her an honourable sustenance.
O the wives of the Prophet! You are not like any other women – if you really fear Allah, do not speak softly lest the one in whose heart is a disease have any inclination, and speak fairly.
And remain in your houses and do not unveil yourselves like the unveiling prevalent in the times of ignorance, and keep the prayer established, and pay the charity, and obey Allah and His Noble Messenger; Allah only wills to remove all impurity from you, O the People of the Household, and by cleansing you make you utterly pure. (*The Holy Prophet’s household.)
And remember what is recited in your houses, from Allah’s verses and wisdom*; indeed Allah knows the minutest things, is All Aware. (The Holy Qur’an and the sayings- hadith – of the Holy Prophet.)
Indeed the Muslim men and Muslim women, and the believing men and the believing women, and the men who obey and the women who obey, and the truthful men and the truthful women, and the patient men and the patient women, and the humble men and the humble women, and charitable men and the charitable women, and the fasting men and the fasting women, and the men who guard their chastity and the women who guard their chastity, and the men who profusely remember Allah and the women who profusely remember Allah – for all of them, Allah has kept prepared forgiveness and an immense reward.
And no Muslim man or woman has any right in the affair, when Allah and His Noble Messenger have decreed a command regarding it; and whoever does not obey the command of Allah and His Noble Messenger, has indeed clearly gone very astray.
And O dear Prophet, remember when you said to him upon whom Allah has bestowed favour and you had bestowed favour, “Keep your wife with you, and fear Allah”, and you kept in your heart what Allah willed to make known, and you feared criticism from the people; and Allah has more right that you should fear Him; so when Zaid became unconcerned with her, We gave her to you in marriage, so that there may be no sin upon believers in respect of the wives of their adopted sons when they have become unconcerned with them; and the command of Allah must be carried out.
There is no blame upon the Prophet regarding the matter that Allah has decreed for him; it has been Allah’s tradition in those who passed before; and the command of Allah is a certain destiny.
Those who deliver the messages of Allah and fear Him, and do not fear anyone except Allah; and Allah is Sufficient to take account.
Mohammed (peace and blessings be upon him) is not the father of any man among you – but he is the Noble Messenger of Allah and the Last of the Prophets*; and Allah knows all things. (* Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him – is the Last Prophet. There can be no new Prophet after him).
O People who Believe! Remember Allah profusely.
And proclaim His Purity, morning and evening.
It is He Who sends blessings upon you*, and so do His angels, so that He may bring you out from darkness into light; and He is Most Merciful upon the Muslims. (* Upon the companions of the Holy Prophet).
For them the salutation upon their meeting* is “Peace”; and an honourable reward is kept prepared for them. (* Upon death / while entering Paradise / meeting with Allah).
O Herald of the Hidden! We have indeed sent you as an observing present witness and a Herald of glad tidings and warning.
And as a caller towards Allah, by His command, and as a sun that enlightens. (The Holy Prophet is a light from Allah.)
And give glad tidings to the believers that for them is Allah’s extreme munificence.
And do not please the disbelievers and the hypocrites, and overlook the pain they cause and rely upon Allah; and Allah suffices as a Trustee.
O People who Believe! If you marry Muslim women and divorce them without having touched them, so for you there is no waiting period for the women, which you may count; therefore give them some benefit and release them with a proper release.
O Herald of the Hidden! We have indeed made lawful for you the wives to whom you have paid their bridal money, and the bondwomen you possess whom Allah gave you as war booty, and the daughters of your paternal uncles, and the daughters of your paternal aunts, and the daughters of your maternal uncles, and the daughters of your maternal aunts, those who migrated with you; and the believing woman if she gifts her life to the Prophet, if the Prophet desires to take her in marriage; this is exclusively for you, not for your followers; We indeed know what We have enjoined upon the Muslims concerning their wives and the bondwomen they possess – this exclusivity for you is so that you may not have constraints; and Allah is Oft Forgiving, Most Merciful.
Put back in the order whom you wish among them and give your proximity to whomever you wish; and if you incline towards one whom you had set aside, there is no sin upon you in it; this command is closer to their eyes remaining soothed and not grieving, and all of them remaining happy with whatever you give them; and Allah knows what is in the hearts of you all; and Allah is All Knowing, Most Forbearing.
Other women are not permitted for you after these, nor that you change them for other wives even if their beauty pleases you except the bondwomen whom you possess; and Allah is the Guardian over all things.
O People who Believe! Do not enter the houses of the Prophet without permission, as when called for a meal but not to linger around waiting for it – and if you are invited then certainly present yourself and when you have eaten, disperse – not staying around delighting in conversation; indeed that was causing harassment to the Prophet, and he was having regard for you; and Allah does not shy in proclaiming the truth; and when you ask the wives of the Prophet for anything to use, ask for it from behind a curtain; this is purer for your hearts and for their hearts; and you have no right to trouble the Noble Messenger of Allah, nor ever marry any of his wives after him; indeed that is a very severe matter in the sight of Allah. (To honour the Holy Prophet – peace and blessings be upon him – is part of faith. To disrespect him is blasphemy.)
Whether you disclose a thing or keep it hidden – then indeed Allah knows all things.
There is no sin upon your wives in (dealing with) their fathers, or their sons, or their brothers, or their brothers’ sons, or their sisters’ sons or women of their own religion, or their bondwomen; and O women, keep fearing Allah; indeed all things are present in front of Allah.
Indeed Allah and His angels send blessings on the Prophet; O People who Believe! Send blessings and abundant salutations upon him. (Everlasting peace and unlimited blessings be upon the Holy Prophet Mohammed.)
Indeed those who trouble Allah and His Noble Messenger – upon them is Allah’s curse in the world and in the Hereafter, and Allah has kept prepared a disgraceful punishment for them. (To disrespect / trouble the Holy Prophet – peace and blessings be upon him – is blasphemy.)
And those who unnecessarily harass Muslim men and women, have burdened themselves with slander and open sin.
O Prophet! Command your wives and your daughters and the women of the Muslims to cover their faces with a part of their cloaks; this is closer to their being recognised and not being harassed; and Allah is Oft Forgiving, Most Merciful. (It is incumbent upon women to cover themselves properly.)
If the hypocrites, and those in whose hearts is a disease, and the rumour mongers in Medinah do not desist, We shall then surely impel you against them, so then they will not remain your neighbours in Medinah except for a few days.
Accursed – to be caught wherever found and to be slain thoroughly.
The tradition of Allah prevalent among those who passed away before; and you will never find the traditions of Allah changing.
People ask you regarding the Last Day; proclaim, “Its knowledge is only with Allah; and what do you know, the Last Day may really be near!”
Allah has indeed cursed the disbelievers, and has kept prepared for them a blazing fire.
In which they will remain forever; in it they will find neither a protector nor any supporter.
On the day when their faces will be overturned being roasted inside the fire, they will say, “Alas – if only we had obeyed Allah and obeyed His Noble Messenger!”
And they will say, “Our Lord! We followed our chiefs and our elders – so they misled us from the path!”
“Our Lord! Give them double the punishment of the fire and send upon them a mighty curse!”
O People who Believe! Do not be like the people who troubled Moosa – so Allah freed him from the allegations they had uttered; and Moosa is honourable in the sight of Allah.
O People who Believe! Fear Allah, and speak rightly.
He will rectify your deeds for you and forgive you your sins; and whoever obeys Allah and His Noble Messenger, has indeed achieved a great success.
We indeed offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains, but they refused it and were afraid of it – and man accepted it; indeed he is one who puts himself into hardship, is extremely unwise.
In order that Allah may punish the hypocrite men, and the hypocrite women, and the polytheist men, and the polytheist women – and accept the repentance of believing men and believing women; and Allah is Oft Forgiving, Most Merciful.
