All praise is to Allah, the Maker of the heavens and the earth, Who assigns angels as messengers – who have pairs of two, three, four wings; He increases in creation whatever He wills; indeed Allah is Able to do all things.
No one can withhold the mercy which Allah opens to mankind; and whatever He withholds – so after it, none can release it; and only He is the Most Honourable, the Wise.
O people! Remember the favour of Allah upon you; is there a Creator other than Allah who can provide you sustenance from the sky and the earth? There is no God except Him; so where are you reverting?
And if they deny you, many Noble Messengers were denied before you; and towards Allah only is the return of all matters.
O people! Allah’s promise is indeed true; therefore do not ever let the worldly life deceive you; nor ever let the great cheat deceive you in respect of Allah’s commands.
Indeed Satan is your enemy, therefore you too take him as an enemy; he only calls his group so that they become the people of hell!
For the disbelievers is a severe punishment; and for those who accepted faith and did good deeds is forgiveness, and an immense reward.
So will one whose misdeeds are made seeming good to him – so he deems them good – be ever equal to the one who is upon guidance? Therefore indeed Allah sends astray whomever He wills, and guides whomever He wills; so may not your life be lost in despairing after them; Allah knows their deeds very well.
And it is Allah Who sent the winds – so they raise clouds and We then direct it towards a dead city – so with it We revive the earth after its death; and this is how the resurrection will be.
Whoever desires honour – therefore all honour belongs to Allah!* Towards Him only ascends the pure good speech, and He raises high the pious deed; and for those who conspire evil is a severe punishment; and their own conspiracy will be destroyed. (It is Allah Who bestows honour, to whomever He wills.)
And Allah created you from clay, then a drop of liquid, then made you as couples; and no female conceives or gives birth except with His knowledge; and every aged being that is given the age, and every one whose life is kept short – all this is in a Book; indeed this is easy for Allah.
And the two seas are not alike; this is sweet, very sweet and palatable – and this is salty, bitter; and from each you eat fresh meat and extract the ornament which you wear; and you see the ship cleaving through it, so that you may seek His munificence, and in some way become grateful.
He brings the night in a part of the day and He brings the day in a part of the night; and He has subjected the sun and moon; each one runs to its fixed term; such is Allah, your Lord – only His is the kingship; and those whom you worship instead of Him do not own even the husk of a date-seed.
If you call them, they do not hear your call; and supposedly if they heard it, they cannot fulfil your needs; and on the Day of Resurrection they will deny your ascribed partnership; and none will inform you like Him Who informs.
O people! You are dependant on Allah; and Allah only is the Independent (Absolute, Not Needing Anything), the Most Praiseworthy.
If He wills, He can take you away and bring other creatures.
And this not at all difficult for Allah.
And no burdened soul will carry another soul’s burden; and if a burdened soul calls another to share the burden, no one will carry any part of it, even if he is a close relative; O dear Prophet (Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him), your warning only benefits those who fear their Lord without seeing and who keep the prayer established; and whoever cleansed himself, has cleansed for his own benefit; and towards Allah only is the return.
And the blind and the sighted are not equal!
And neither are darkness and brightness!
And neither are the shadow and the hot sunshine!
And not equal are the living and the dead! Indeed Allah causes them to listen*, whomever He wills; and you cannot make those who are in the graves** listen. (* Listen to guidance **The disbelievers are referred to as dead, whose fates are sealed.)
You are purely a Herald of Warning.
And O dear Prophet (Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him), We have indeed sent you with the Truth, giving glad tidings and heralding warnings; and there was a Herald of Warning in every group.
And if these disbelievers deny you, those before them had also denied; their Noble Messengers came to them with clear proofs and scriptures and the bright Book.
Then I seized the disbelievers; so how did denial My rejection turn out?
Have you not seen that it is Allah Who causes the water to descend from the sky? So with it We have grown various colourful fruits; and among the mountains are tracks white and red, of different hues, and others dark black.
And similarly the colours of men and beasts and cattle, are different; among the bondmen of Allah, only the people of knowledge fear Him; indeed Allah is the Most Honourable, Oft Forgiving.
Indeed those who read the Book of Allah, and keep the prayer established, and spend from what We have bestowed upon them in secret and publicly, are hopeful of a trade in which there is never a loss.
In order that He may reward them with goodness in full, and further increase it with His munificence; indeed He is Oft Forgiving, Most Appreciative.
And the Book which We have divinely revealed to you – that is the Truth, confirming the Books which were before it; indeed Allah is Aware of His bondmen, All Seeing.
We then made Our chosen bondmen the inheritors of the Book; so among them is one who wrongs himself; and among them is one who stays on the middle course; and among them is one who, by the command of Allah, surpassed others in good deeds; this is the great favour!
They shall enter the Gardens of everlasting stay (Eden) – in which they shall be given to adorn armlets of gold and pearls; and their garment in it is silk.
And they will say; “All praise is to Allah Who has put away our grief; indeed Our Lord is Oft Forgiving, Most Appreciative.”
“The One Who has, by His munificence, established us in a place of serenity; in which no hardship shall ever reach us nor any fatigue affect us.”
And for those who disbelieved is the fire of hell; neither does their final seizure come that they may die, nor is its punishment lightened for them; this is how We punish every extremely ungrateful person.
And they shall be screaming in it; “Our Lord! Extricate us, so that we may do good deeds, the opposite of what we used to do”; (It will be said to them) “And did We not give you an age long enough, in which anyone who wants to understand would have understood? And the Herald of Warning did come to you; therefore now taste it – for the unjust do not have any supporter.”
Indeed Allah is All Knowing – of all the hidden things in the heavens and in the earth; indeed He knows what lies within the hearts.
It is He Who has made you the successors of your predecessors in the earth; so whoever disbelieves – (the harm of) his disbelief falls only on him; and for the disbelievers, their disbelief increases nothing in their Lord’s sight except disgust; and for the disbelievers, their disbelief increases nothing for them except ruin.
Proclaim, “Just show me your partners (false deities) whom you worship other than Allah; show me which part of the earth have they created – or do they have any share in the heavens?” Or have We given them some Book, so they are on its clear proofs? In fact the unjust do not give promises to each other, except of deceit.
Indeed Allah restrains the heavens and the earth from convulsing; and were they to convulse, who could stop them except Allah? Indeed He is Most Forbearing, Oft Forgiving.
And they swore by Allah most vehemently in their oaths, that if a Herald of Warning came to them, they would be more upon guidance than any other group; then when a Herald of Warning did come to them, he increased nothing in them except hatred.
Priding themselves in the earth and scheming evil; and the evil scheming falls only upon those who scheme it; so what are they waiting for, except the tradition of the earlier nations? So you will never find the traditions of Allah changing; and you will never find Allah’s law being avoided.
And did they not travel in the land in order to see what sort of fate befell those who were before them, whereas they exceeded them in strength? And Allah is not such that anything in the heavens or in the earth can break away from His control; indeed He is All Knowing, Able.
If Allah were to seize people upon their deeds, He would leave no creature walking on the surface of the earth, but He gives them respite till a fixed term; and when their term comes – so indeed Allah is observing all His bondmen!
