Yaa-Seen (Alphabets of Arabic language – Allah and to whomever He reveals, know their precise meanings.)
By oath of the wise Qur’an.
You (O dear Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him) are indeed one of the Noble Messengers.
On the Straight Path.
(The Qur’an is) Sent down by the Almighty, the Most Merciful.
So that you may warn these people whose ancestors were not warned, they are therefore unaware.
Undoubtedly, it (their disbelief) has proved true for most of them, so they will not believe.
We have indeed put shackles around their necks reaching up to the chins, so they remain facing upwards.
And We have set a wall before them and a wall behind them, and covered the top – so they are unable to see anything.
And it is the same for them, whether you warn them or do not warn them – they will not believe.
You warn only him who follows the advice and fears the Most Gracious without seeing; therefore give him glad tidings of forgiveness and an honourable reward.
We will surely bring the dead to life and We record what they send ahead and the signs they will leave behind; and We have accounted all things in a clear Book.
And relate to them the signs of the people of the city – when two emissaries came to them.
When We had sent two towards them and they denied them both, so We fortified them with a third, and they all said, “Indeed we have been sent to you.”
They said, “You are nothing but mortals like us; the Most Gracious has not sent down anything – you are nothing but liars.”
They answered, “Our Lord knows that surely, without doubt, we have been sent towards you.”
“And our duty is nothing but to plainly convey (the message).”
They (the people of the city) said, “We think you are ominous; indeed, if you do not desist, we shall surely stone you to death, and you will surely face a grievous torture at our hands.”
They said, “Your evil omens are with you! What! You get annoyed for being advised? In fact you are a people who transgress the limits!”
And from the outermost part of the city came a man running; he said, “O my people! Obey those who have been sent.”
“Obey those who do not ask any fee from you, and they are on guidance.”
“And what is the matter with me that I should not worship Him Who created me, whereas it is towards Him that you are to return?”
“What! Shall I appoint Gods other than Allah? So that if the Most Gracious should wish me any harm, their intercession would be of no use to me, nor would they be able to save me?”
“Undoubtedly, I am then in open error.”
“Indeed I have believed in your Lord, so heed me.”
It was said to him, “Enter Paradise”; he said, “If only my people knew!”
“The manner in which my Lord has pardoned me and made me of the honoured ones!”
And after him, We did not send down any army from heaven against his people, nor did We intend to send down an army.
It was just one scream, and with it they were extinguished.
And it was said, “Woe to those bondmen – whenever a Noble Messenger comes to them, they mock at him!”
Have they not seen how many generations We destroyed before them, which will not return to them?
And without exception, all of them will be brought forth before Us.
And a sign for them is the dead earth; We gave it life and We produced from it grain, so they eat from it.
And We have placed in it gardens of dates and grapes, and We have made springs of water in it.
So that they may eat from its fruits, whereas they are not manufactured by their hands! So will they not be grateful?
Purity is to Him Who created all pairs, from what the earth grows, and of themselves, and from the things they do not know.
And a sign for them is the night; We strip the day out of it, thereupon they are in darkness.
And the sun runs its course for its final destination; this is a command of the Almighty, the All Knowing.
And We have appointed positions for the moon till it returns like an old branch of the date palm.
It is not for the sun to catch up with the moon, nor does the night surpass the day; and each one of them floats in its orbit.
And a sign for them is that We lodged them in a laden ship, while they were in their forefathers backs.
And We have created for them similar ships, in which they now ride.
And if We will, We can drown them, so there would be no help in their distress, nor would they be saved.
Unless by mercy from Us, and as a comfort for a while.
And when it is said to them, “Beware of what is before you and what is behind you, in the hope of your gaining mercy”, they turn away!
And whenever a sign comes to them from the signs of their Lord, they always turn away from it!
And when it is said to them, “Spend in Allah’s cause, from what Allah has provided you”, the disbelievers say regarding the believers, “Shall we feed these, whom if Allah willed, would have fed? You are not but in open error!”
And they say, “When will this promise be fulfilled, if you are truthful?”
They await just one scream, which will overcome them while they are involved in worldly disputes.
Therefore neither able to make a will, nor returning to their homes.
And the Trumpet will be blown – so they will come forth from the graves, running towards their Lord.
Saying, “O our misfortune! Who has raised us from our sleep? This is what the Most Gracious had promised, and the Noble Messengers had spoken the truth!”
It is just one scream, and every one of them will be brought together before Us!
So this day no soul will be wronged in the least; and you will not be compensated except for your deeds.
Indeed this day the dwellers of Paradise are in comfort, with blissful hearts.
They and their wives are in shades, reclining on thrones.
In it (paradise) are fruits for them and whatever they ask for.
Upon them will be “Peace” – a Word from their Merciful Lord!
“And be separated (from others) this day, O you criminals!”
“O Descendants of Adam! Did I not take a covenant from you that you shall not worship the devil? Undoubtedly, he is your open enemy.”
“And that you shall worship Me? This is the Straight Path.”
“And he has indeed led a large number of you astray; so did you not have sense?”
“This is hell, which you were promised.”
“Enter it this day – the recompense of your disbelief.”
This day We will set a seal on their mouths, and their hands will speak out to Us and their feet will bear witness to their deeds.
And had We willed, We could have quenched their eyes so they would rush towards the path, unable to see a thing.
And had We willed, We could have disfigured their faces while they were in their homes, therefore unable to go forward or turn back.
And whomever We bring to an old age, We reverse him in creation; so do they not understand?
And We have not taught him (Prophet Mohammed- peace and blessings be upon him) to recite poetry, nor does it befit him; it is nothing but an advice and the bright Qur’an.
To warn the living*, and to prove the Word against disbelievers. (Only the believers are deemed alive in Allah’s sight.)
Did they not see that We have created animals for them from Our handiwork, so they are their owners?
And have subjected the animals for them, so they ride some animals and eat some?
And for them in the animals are numerous different benefits and drinks; so will they not be grateful?
And they have appointed Gods other than Allah, that perhaps they may be helped!
They (the appointed Gods) cannot help them; and they and their armies will come (to Us), as captives.
Therefore (O dear Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him) do not grieve because of what they (the disbelievers) say; indeed We know what they conceal and what they disclose.
And did not man see that We have created him from a drop of semen? Yet he is an open quarreller!
And he invents an example for Us, while forgetting his own creation, saying, “Who is such that can revive the bones when they have completely rotted away?”
Proclaim (O dear Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him), “They will be revived by the One Who created them the first time; and He is the All Knowing of every creation.”
“The One Who has created for you fire from the green tree, so you kindle from it.”
And is it not possible for the One Who created the heavens and the earth to create the likes of them? It is surely possible, why not? And He is the Great Creator, the All Knowing of everything.
And His only task when He intends a thing is to command it, “Be” – and it thereupon happens!
Therefore Purity is to Him in Whose Hand* is the control over all things and it is towards Him that you will be returned. (Used as a metaphor to mean Power).
