By oath of those who establish proper ranks.
And by oath of those who herd with a stern warning.
And by oath of the groups that read the Qur’an.
Indeed your God is surely only One.
Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them – and the Lord of the sun’s rising points.
We have indeed adorned the lowest heaven with stars as ornaments.
And to protect it from every rebellious devil.
They cannot listen to the speech of those on higher elevations and they are targeted from every side.
To make them flee, and for them is a never-ending punishment.
Except one who sometimes steals a part, so a blazing flame goes after him.
Therefore ask them (O dear Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him), “Are they a stronger creation, or are other things of our creation, (the angels, the heavens etc.)?” We have indeed created them from sticky clay.
Rather you are surprised, whereas they keep mocking.
And they do not understand, when explained to.
And whenever they see a sign, they mock at it.
And they say, “This is nothing but clear magic.”
“When we are dead and have turned into dust and bones, will we certainly be raised again?”
“And also our forefathers?”
Proclaim, “Yes, and with disgrace.”
So that is just a single jolt, thereupon they will begin staring.
And will say, “O our misfortune!” It will be said to them, “This is the Day of Justice.”
“This is the Day of Judgement, which you used to deny!”
“Gather all the unjust persons and their spouses, and all that they used to worship!” –
“Instead of Allah – and herd them to the path leading to hell.”
“And stop them – they are to be questioned.”
“What is the matter with you, that you do not help one another?”
In fact this day they have all surrendered.
And some of them inclined towards others, mutually questioning.
They said, “It is you who used to come to us from our right, in order to sway.”
They will answer, “You yourselves did not have faith!”
“And we did not have any control over you; but in fact you yourselves were rebellious.”
“So the Word of our Lord has proved true upon us; we will surely have to taste (the punishment).”
“We therefore led you astray, for we ourselves were astray!”
So this day they all are partners in the punishment.
This is how We deal with the guilty.
Indeed, when it was said to them, “There is no God except Allah”, they were haughty.
And they used to say, “Shall we forsake our Gods upon the sayings of a mad poet?”
In fact he has brought the Truth, and testified for the Noble Messengers!
“You surely have to taste the painful punishment.”
“And you will not be compensated except for your deeds.”
Except the chosen bondmen of Allah.
For them is the sustenance known to Us.
Fruits; and they will be honoured.
In Gardens of peace.
Facing one another on thrones.
Cups of wine will be presented to them in rounds, from a spring flowing in front of them.
White, delicious for the drinkers.
Neither does it intoxicate, nor give a headache.
And with them are those who do not set gaze upon men except their husbands, the maidens with gorgeous eyes.
As if they were eggs, safely hidden.
So one among them turns to the other, questioning. –
The speaker among them said, “I had a companion.” –
“Who used to tell me, ‘Do you believe it is true?’ –
‘That when we are dead and have turned into dust and bones, that we will either be rewarded or punished?’”
He said (to others on the thrones), “Will you take a glimpse (into hell) below?”
He therefore looked down and saw him amidst the blazing fire.
He said, “By Allah, you had nearly ruined me!”
“And were it not for the munificence of my Lord, I too would have been seized and brought forth (captive)!”
“So are we never to die?” (The people of Paradise will ask the angels, with delight, after the announcement of everlasting life.)
“Except our earlier death, and nor will we be punished?”
“This is, most certainly, the supreme success.”
For such a reward should the workers perform.
So is this welcome better, or the tree of Zaqqum?
We have indeed made that a punishment for the unjust.
Indeed it is a tree that sprouts from the base of hell.
Its fruit like the heads of demons.
So indeed they will eat from it, and fill their bellies with it.
Then after it, indeed for them is the drink of boiling hot water.
Then surely their return is towards hell.
They had indeed found their forefathers astray.
So they hastily follow their footsteps!
And indeed before them, most of the former people went astray.
And indeed We had sent Heralds of warnings among them.
Therefore see what sort of fate befell those who were warned!
Except the chosen bondmen of Allah.
And indeed Nooh prayed to Us – so what an excellent Acceptor of Prayer We are!
And We rescued him and his household from the great calamity.
And We preserved his descendants.
And We kept his praise among the latter generations.
Peace be upon Nooh, among the entire people.
This is how We reward the virtuous.
He is indeed one of Our high ranking, firmly believing bondmen.
We then drowned the others.
And indeed Ibrahim is from his (Nooh’s) group.
When he came to his Lord, with a sound heart. (Free from falsehood).
When he said to his father (paternal uncle) and his people, “What do you worship?”
“What! You desire, through fabrication, Gods other than Allah?”
“So what do you assume regarding the Lord Of The Creation?” (That He will not punish you?)
He then shot a glance at the stars.
He then said, “I feel sick (of you)!”
And they turned their backs on him and went away. (The pagans thought he would transmit the disease).
He then sneaked upon their deities and said, “Do you not eat?”
“What is the matter with you, that you do not say anything?”
He then began striking them with his right hand, unseen by the people.
So the disbelievers came running towards him.
He said, “What! You worship what you yourselves have sculpted?”
“Whereas Allah has created you and your actions?”
They said, “Construct a building (furnace) for him, and then cast him in the blazing fire!”
So they tried to execute their evil scheme upon him – We therefore degraded them. (Allah saved him, by commanding the fire to turn cool).
And he said, “Indeed I shall go to my Lord Who will guide me.”
“My Lord! Give me a meritorious child.”
We therefore gave him the glad tidings of an intelligent son.
And when he became capable of working with him, Ibrahim said, “O my son, I dreamt that I am sacrificing you – therefore now consider what is your opinion”; he said, “O my father! Do what you are commanded! Allah willing, you will soon find me patiently enduring!”
Then (remember) when they both submitted to Allah’s command, and Ibrahim lay his son facing downwards. (The knife did not hurt Ismail)
And We called out to him, “O Ibrahim!”
“You have indeed made the dream come true”; and this is how We reward the virtuous.
Indeed this was a clear test.
And We rescued him in exchange of a great sacrifice. (The sacrifice of Ibrahim and Ismail – peace be upon them – is commemorated every year on 10, 11 and 12 Zil Haj).
And We kept his praise among the latter generations.
Peace be upon Ibrahim!
This is how We reward the virtuous.
He is indeed one of Our high ranking, firmly believing bondmen.
And We gave him the glad tidings of Ishaq, a Herald of the Hidden, from among those who deserve Our proximity.
And We sent blessings upon him and Ishaq; and among their descendants – some who do good deeds, and some who clearly wrong themselves.
And We indeed did a great favour to Moosa and Haroon.
And rescued them and their people from the great calamity.
And We helped them, so they were victorious.
And We bestowed the clear Book to both of them.
And guided them to the Straight Path.
And We kept their praise among the latter generations.
Peace be upon Moosa and Haroon!
This is how We reward the virtuous.
Indeed they are two of Our high ranking, firmly believing bondmen.
And indeed Ilyas is one of the Noble Messengers.
When he said to his people, “Do you not fear?”
“What! You worship Baal (an idol) and leave the Best Creator?” –
“Allah – Who is your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers?”
In response they denied him, so they will surely be brought forth as captives.
Except the chosen bondmen of Allah.
And We kept his praise among the latter generations.
Peace be upon Ilyas!
This is how We reward the virtuous.
He is indeed one of Our high ranking, firmly believing bondmen.
And indeed Lut is one of the Noble Messengers.
When We rescued him and his entire household.
Except an old woman, who became of those who stayed behind.
We then destroyed the others.
And indeed you pass over them in the morning. –
And during the night; so do you not have sense?
And indeed Yunus is one of the Noble Messengers.
When he left towards the laden ship.
Then lots were drawn and he became of those who were pushed into the sea.
The fish then swallowed him and he blamed himself. (For not waiting for Allah’s command.)
And were he not one of those who praise. –
He would have remained in its belly till the day when all will be raised.
We then put him ashore on a plain, and he was sick.
And We grew a tree of gourd (as a shelter) above him.
And We sent him towards a hundred thousand people, in fact more.
So they accepted faith – We therefore gave them usage for a while.
Therefore ask them (O dear Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him), whether the daughters are for your Lord and the sons for them!
Or that have We created the angels as females, while they were present?
Pay heed! It is their slander that they say. –
That “Allah has offspring”; and indeed, surely, they are liars.
“Has he chosen daughters instead of sons?”
“What is the matter with you? What sort of a judgement you impose!”
“So do you not ponder?”
“Or do you have some clear proof?”
“Then bring forth your Book, if you are truthful!”
And they have appointed a relationship between Him and the jinns; and indeed the jinns surely know that they will be brought forth.
Purity is to Allah from the matters they fabricate.
Except the chosen bondmen of Allah.
Therefore you and all what you worship. (The disbelievers and their deities.)
You cannot make anyone rebel against Him.
Except the one who will go into the blazing fire.
And the angels say, “Each one of us has an appointed known position.”
“And indeed we, with our wings spread, await the command.”
“And indeed we are those who say His purity.”
And indeed the disbelievers used to say, –
“If we had some advice from the earlier generations,” –
“We would certainly be the chosen bondmen of Allah.”
They therefore denied it, so they will soon come to know.
And indeed Our Word has already gone forth for Our bondmen who were sent.
That undoubtedly, only they will be helped.
And surely, only Our army will be victorious.
Therefore turn away from them for some time.
And watch them, for they will soon see.
So are they being impatient for Our punishment?
So when it does descend in their courtyards – so what an evil morning it will be for those who were warned!
And turn away from them for some time.
And wait, for they will soon see.
Purity is to your Lord, the Lord of Honour, from all what they say.
And peace is upon the Noble Messengers.
And all praise is to Allah, the Lord Of The Creation.
