Saad* – By oath of the renowned Qur’an, (Alphabet of the Arabic language; Allah and to whomever He reveals, know their precise meanings.)
In fact, the disbelievers are in false pride and opposition.
Many a generation We did destroy before them – thereupon they cried out whereas it is not the time to escape!
And they were surprised that a Herald of Warning came to them from among themselves; and the disbelievers said, “He is a magician, a great liar!”
“Has he made all the Gods into One God? This is really something very strange!”
And their leaders went about, “Leave him and cling steadfastly to your Gods! Indeed he has a hidden objective in this!”
“We never heard of this even in Christianity, the latest religion; this is clearly a newly fabricated matter.”
“Is the Qur’an which is sent to him, among us?” In fact they are in a doubt concerning My Book; in fact, they have not yet tasted My punishment.
Or do they hold the treasures of the mercy of your Lord, the Almighty, the Great Bestower?
Is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, for them? So would they not just ascend using ropes?
This is just one of the disgraced armies, that will be routed there and then.
Before them, the people of Nooh had denied, and the tribe of A’ad, and Firaun who used to crucify.
And the tribe of Thamud, and the people of Lut, and the People of the Woods; these are the groups.
None of them was such that it did not deny the Noble Messengers, therefore My punishment became inevitable.
They await just one Scream, which no one can avert.
And they said, “Our Lord! Give us our share quickly, before the Day of Reckoning.”
Have patience upon what they say, and remember Our bondman Dawud, the one blessed with favours; he is indeed most inclined (towards His Lord).
Indeed We subjected the hills to say the praise with him, at night and at morn.
And birds gathered together; they were all obedient to him.
And We strengthened his kingdom and gave him wisdom and just speech.
And did the news of the two disputants reach you? When they scaled over the wall into Dawud’s mosque.
When they entered upon David, so he feared them – they said, “Do not fear! We are two disputants, one of whom has wronged the other, therefore judge fairly between us and do not judge unjustly – and show us the right way.”
“This is my brother; he has ninety nine ewes and I have one ewe; and he now says ‘Give that one also to me’ – and he is very demanding in speech.”
Said Dawud, “He is indeed being unjust to you in that he demands to add your ewe to his ewes; and indeed most partners wrong one another, except those who believe and do good deeds – and they are very few!” Thereupon Dawud realised that We had tested him, so he sought forgiveness from his Lord, and fell prostrate and inclined (towards his Lord). (Command of Prostration # 10)
We therefore forgave him this; and indeed for him in Our presence are, surely, proximity and an excellent abode.
“O Dawud! We have indeed appointed you as a Viceroy in the earth, therefore judge between mankind with the truth, and do not follow desire for it will lead you astray from Allah’s path; indeed for those who stray away from Allah’s path is a severe punishment, because they forgot the Day of Reckoning.”
And We have not created the heaven and the earth and all that is between them without purpose; this is what the disbelievers assume; therefore ruin is for the disbelievers, by the fire.
Shall We make those who believe and do good deeds equal to those who spread turmoil in the earth? Or shall We equate the pious with the disobedient?
This is a Book which We have sent down upon you, a blessed Book, for them to ponder upon its verses, and for men of intellect to accept advice.
And We bestowed Sulaiman to Dawud; what an excellent bondman! He is indeed most inclined.
When fast footed steeds were presented to him at evening.
Therefore Sulaiman said, “I cherish the love of these horses*, out of remembrance of my Lord”; he then ordered them to be raced until they vanished in a curtain out of sight. (To be used in holy war.)
He then ordered, “Bring them back to me”; and he began caressing their shins and necks.
And We indeed tested Sulaiman, and placed a dead body on his throne – he therefore inclined towards His Lord.
He said, “My Lord! Forgive me and bestow upon me a kingdom, which shall not befit anyone after me; indeed only You are the Great Bestower.”
We therefore gave the wind under his control, moving steadily by his command wherever he wished.
And made the demons subservient to him, all builders and divers.
And other demons bound in chains.
“This is Our bestowal – you may therefore bestow favours or withhold them – you will not be questioned.”
And indeed for him in Our presence are, surely, proximity and an excellent abode.
And remember Our bondman Ayyub (Job); when he cried out* to his Lord, “The devil has struck me with hardship and pain.” (After seven years of patience.)
We said to him, “Strike the earth with your foot; this cool spring is for bathing and drinking.” (A spring of gushed forth when he struck the earth – this was a miracle.)
And We bestowed his household to him and one more similar to it – as a mercy from Us, and as a remembrance for the people of intellect.
And We said, “Take a broom in your hand and strike her with it, and do not break your vow”; We indeed found him patiently enduring; what an excellent bondman! He is indeed most inclined.
And remember Our bondmen Ibrahim, and Ishaq, and Yaqub – the men of power and knowledge.
We indeed gave them distinction with a genuine affair – the remembrance of the (everlasting) abode.
And in Our sight, they are indeed the chosen ones, the beloved.
And remember Ismail and Yasa’a (Elisha) and Zul-Kifl; and they are all excellent.
This is an advice; and indeed for the pious is an excellent abode.
Everlasting Gardens – all its gates are open for them.
Reclining on pillows, in it they ask for fruits and drinks in plenty.
And with them are the pure spouses, who do not set gaze upon men except their husbands, of single age.
This is the promise being given to you, for the Day of Reckoning.
Indeed this is Our sustenance, which will never end.
This is for the virtuous; and indeed for the rebellious is a wretched destination.
Hell; which they shall enter; what an evil resting-place!
This is for the criminals – so that they may taste it – boiling hot water and pus.
And similar other punishments in pairs.
“Here is another group that was with you, falling along with you”; they will answer, “Do not give them plenty of open space; they surely have to enter the fire – let them also be confined!”
The followers will say, “In fact, for you! May you not get open space! It is you who brought this calamity upon us!” So what a wretched destination.
They say, “Our Lord! Whoever has brought this calamity upon us – double the punishment of the fire for him!”
And they say, “What is the matter with us that we do not see the men whom we thought were evil?”
“Did we mock at them or did our eyes turn away from them?”
Indeed this is really true – the people of the hell quarrelling among themselves.
Proclaim (O dear Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him), “I am purely a Herald of Warning – and there is no God except Allah, the One, the All Dominant.”
“Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them – the Almighty, the Oft Forgiving.”
Say, “That is a great tidings.”
“You are neglectful of it!”
“What did I know of the heavenly world, when the angels had disputed.”
“I receive only the divine revelations, that I am purely a clear Herald of Warning.”
(Remember) When your Lord said to the angels, “I will create a human from clay.” –
“So when I have perfected him and breathed into him a spirit from Myself, (you all) fall down before him in prostration.”
So all the angels prostrated, every one, without exception.
Except Iblis; he was proud and was, from the beginning, a disbeliever.
Said Allah, “O Iblis! What prevented you from prostrating before one whom I have created with My hands*? Have you become proud or were you haughty from the beginning?” (Used as a metaphor).
Said Iblis, “I am better than him; You made me from fire, and You have created him from clay!”
He said, “Therefore exit from heaven, for you have been outcast.” (To disrespect the Prophets – peace and blessings be upon them – is blasphemy.)
“And indeed My curse is upon you till the Day of Judgement.”
He said, “My Lord! Therefore give me respite till the day when all will be raised.”
Said Allah, “You are therefore among those given respite.”
“Until the time of the known day.”
He said, “Therefore, by oath of Your honour, I will surely mislead all of them.”
“Except Your chosen bondmen among them.”
Said Allah, “So this is the truth; and I speak only the truth.” –
“That I will fill hell with you and with those among them who follow you, all together.”
Say (O dear Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him) “I do not ask any fee from you for the Qur’an, and I am not a fabricator.”
“It is not but an advice for the entire world.”
“And you will come to know of its tidings, after a while.”
