Ha-Meem. (Alphabets of the Arabic language – Allah, and to whomever He reveals, know their precise meanings.)
By oath of this clear Book.
We have indeed sent it down in a blessed night – indeed it is We Who warn.
During it are distributed all the works of wisdom.
By a command from Us – indeed it is We Who send.
A mercy from your Lord; indeed He only is the All Hearing, the All Knowing.
The Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them; if you people believe.
There is no worship except for Him – He gives life and causes death; your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers.
Rather they are in doubt, playing.
So you await the day when the sky will bring forth a visible smoke. –
Which will envelop the people; this is a painful punishment.
Thereupon they will say, “O our Lord! Remove the punishment from us – we now accept faith.”
How is it possible for them to accept guidance, whereas a Noble Messenger who speaks clearly has already come to them?
Whereas they had then turned away from him and said, “He is a madman, tutored!”?
We now remove the punishment for some days – so you will again commit the same.
The day when We will seize with the greatest seizure – We will indeed take revenge.
And before them We indeed tried the people of Firaun, and an Honourable Noble Messenger came to them.
Who said, “Give the bondmen of Allah into my custody; I am indeed a trustworthy Noble Messenger for you.”
And saying, “And do not rebel against Allah; I have brought a clear proof to you.”
“And I take the refuge of my Lord and yours, against your stoning me.”
“And if you do not believe in me, then have no relation with me.”
He therefore prayed to his Lord, “These are a guilty nation!”
We commanded him, “Journey with My bondmen in a part of the night – you will be pursued.”
“And leave the sea as it is, parted in several places; indeed that army will be drowned.”
How many gardens and water-springs they left behind!
And fields and grand palaces!
And favours amongst which they were rejoicing!
That is what We did; and We made another nation their heirs.
So the heavens and the earth did not weep for them, and they were not given respite.
And indeed We rescued the Descendants of Israel from a disgraceful torture.
From Firaun; he was indeed proud, among the transgressors.
And We knowingly chose them, among all others of their time.
And We gave them signs in which lay clear favours.
Indeed these disbelievers proclaim; –
“There is nothing except our dying just once, and we will not be raised.”
“Therefore bring back our forefathers, if you are truthful!”
Are they better, or the people of Tubba? And those who were before them? We destroyed them; they were indeed criminals.
And We did not create the heavens and the earth, and all that is between them, just for play.
We did not create them except with the truth, but most of them do not know.
Indeed the Day of Decision is the appointment for all of them.
The day on which, no friends will benefit each other at all, nor will they be helped. (Except those who are pious – see verse 43:67)
Except those upon whom Allah has mercy; indeed He only is the Most Honourable, the Most Merciful.
Indeed the tree of Zaqqum, –
Is the food of the sinners.
Like molten copper; it churns in their bellies.
Like the churning of boiling water.
“Seize him, and forcibly drag him right to the blazing fire.”
“Then pour on his head the punishment of boiling water.”
Saying “Taste it! Indeed you only are the most honourable, the dignified!”
“Indeed this is what you used to doubt about.”
Indeed the pious are in a place of peace.
In Gardens and water-springs.
They will be dressed in fine silk and embroidery, facing one another (on thrones).
So it is; and We have wedded them to maidens with gorgeous eyes.
In it they will ask for all kinds of fruit, with safety.
They will not taste death again in it, except their former death; and Allah has saved them from the punishment of fire.
By the munificence of your Lord; this is the great success.
And We have made this Qur’an easy in your language, for them to understand.
Therefore wait (O dear Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him) – they too are waiting.
