Ha; Meem. (Alphabets of the Arabic language – Allah, and to whomever He reveals, know their precise meanings.)
The sending down of the Book is from Allah, the Most Honourable, the Wise.
Indeed in the heavens and the earth are signs for believers.
And in your creation, and all the creatures He scatters in the earth – in them are signs for the people who are certain.
And in the alternation of night and day, and in the means of sustenance – water – which Allah sends down from the sky whereby He gave life to the earth after its death, and in the movement of the winds – (in all these) are signs for people of intellect.
These are the verses of Allah which We recite to you with the truth; so forsaking Allah and His signs, what will they believe in?
Ruin is for every great slanderer, excessive sinner.
Who hears the verses of Allah which are recited to him, then remains stubborn, proud, as if he did not hear them; therefore give him the glad tidings of a painful punishment.
And when he comes to know about any of the verses, he mocks at it; for them is a disgraceful punishment.
Hell is after them; and what they have earned will not benefit them at all, nor those whom they have chosen as supporters besides Allah; and for them is a terrible punishment.
This is the (true) guidance; and for those who disbelieve in the verses of their Lord is the severest of painful punishments.
It is Allah Who has subjected the sea for you so that ships may sail upon it by His command, and for you to seek His munificence, and so that you may give thanks.
And has subjected for you all whatever is in the heavens and in the earth, by His command; indeed in this are signs for people who ponder.
Tell the believers to ignore those who do not expect the days of Allah, in order that Allah may give a nation the reward of what they used to earn.
Whoever does a good deed, so it is for his own good; and whoever commits evil, does for his own harm; and you will then be returned towards your Lord.
And indeed We gave the Descendants of Israel the Book, and the rule, and the Prophethood, and gave good things for sustenance and gave them superiority over all others of their time.
And We gave them clear proofs in the command; so they did not differ except after the knowledge had come to them – due to jealousy among themselves; indeed your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection concerning the matter in which they differ.
We then placed you (O dear prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him) upon the clear path of the command, therefore continue following it and do not listen to the desires of the ignorant.
Indeed they cannot benefit you at all against Allah; and indeed the unjust are the friends of each other; and Allah is the Friend of the pious.
This is an enlightenment for mankind, and a guidance and mercy for the people of faith.
Do those who commit evil assume that We will make them equal to those who believe and do good deeds, therefore both becoming equal in life and death? What an evil judgement they impose!
And Allah has created the heavens and the earth with the truth, and so that every soul is repaid for what it has earned, and they will not be wronged.
Just look at him who makes his desire as his God, and Allah has sent him astray despite his having knowledge, and set a seal upon his ears and his heart, and a covering upon his eyes; so who will guide him after Allah? So do you not ponder?
And they said, “There is nothing except our life of this world – we die and we live – and nothing destroys us except the passage of time”; and they do not have any knowledge of it; they only make guesses.
And when Our clear verses are recited to them, their only argument is, “Bring back our forefathers, if you are truthful!”
Proclaim (O dear Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him), “It is Allah Who gives you life, then will give you death, then will gather you all on the Day of Resurrection in which there is no doubt, but most people do not know.”
And to Allah only belongs the kingship of the heavens and the earth; and when the Last Day is established – on that day the followers of falsehood will suffer loss.
And you will see every group down on its knees; every group will be called towards its book of deeds; “This day you will be repaid for what you did.”
“This Book of Ours speaks against you with the truth; indeed We had been recording all what you did.”
So those who believed and did good deeds – their Lord will admit them into His mercy; this is the clear triumph.
And to those who disbelieved, it will be said “Was it not that Our verses were recited to you? In response you were haughty and were a guilty people.”
“And when it was said, ‘Indeed Allah’s promise is true and there is no doubt regarding the Last Day”, you used to say, ‘We do not know what the Last Day is – we think it is nothing except an imagination, and we are not convinced.’”
And the evils of their deeds appeared to them, and the punishment they used to mock at encompassed them.
And it will be said, “This day We shall forsake you, the way you had forgotten the confronting of this day of yours – and your destination is the fire, and you do not have any supporters.”
“This is because you mocked at the signs of Allah, and the worldly life deceived you”; so this day they are not to be removed from the fire, nor will anyone seek amends from them.
So all praise is for Allah only, the Lord of the heavens and the Lord of the earth, the Lord of the Creation!
And for Him only is the Greatness, in the heavens and in the earth; and He only is the Most Honourable, the Wise.
