Qaf; by oath of the Glorious Qur’an.
Rather they were shocked that a Herald of Warning came to them from among themselves, so the disbelievers said, “This is something really strange.”
“When we are dead and have turned to dust, will we be raised again? That return is impossible!”
We know all what the earth decreases from them; and with Us is a Book that retains.
In fact they denied the Truth when it came to them, so they are now in a dilemma.
So did they not see the sky above them – how We have made it and beautified it, and there are no cracks in it?
And (how) We have spread the earth, and placed mountains as anchors in it, and have grown all kinds of beautiful pairs in it?
A perception and an understanding, for every bondman who inclines.
And We sent down the auspicious water from the sky, therefore producing gardens with it, and the grain that is harvested.
And high date-palms with lush fruit.
As sustenance for the bondmen; and with it We revived a dead city; this is how you will be raised.
Before these, the people of Nooh had denied, and so did the dwellers of Rass and the Thamud.
And the tribe of A’ad, and Firaun, and the fellowmen of Lut.
And the Dwellers of the Woods, and the people of Tubb’a; each one of them one denied the Noble Messengers, so My promised punishment proved true.
So did We tire by creating the first time? Rather they doubt being created again.
And indeed We have created man and We know what his soul instils in him; and We are nearer to him than the hearts artery.
When the two receiving angels receive from him, one seated on the right and one on the left.
He does not utter a single word, without a ready recorder seated next to him.
And the hardship of death came with the truth; “This is what you were escaping from!”
And the Trumpet was blown; “This is the Day of the promised punishment.”
And every soul came, along with a herder and a witness.
“You were indeed neglectful of this, so We have removed the veil for you, and your eyesight is sharp this day.”
And his accompanying angel said, “This is the record of your deeds, available with me.”
It will be said to the angels, “Both of you fling every excessive ungrateful, stubborn person into hell.”
“The one who excessively prevented from virtue, the transgressor, the doubtful.”
“The one who appointed another God along with Allah – so both of you fling him into the severe punishment.”
His accompanying devil said, “Our Lord! I did not cause him to rebel, but he himself was in extreme error.”
He will say, “Do not dispute before Me – I had already warned you of the punishment.”
“With Me, the decree does not change, and nor do I oppress the bondmen.”
The day when We will ask hell, “Are you filled up?” and it will answer, “Are there some more?”
And Paradise will be brought close to the pious, not far away from them.
This is what you are promised – for every repenting, careful person.
Who fears the Most Gracious without seeing, and came with a heart that inclines.
It will be said to him, “Enter it in peace; this is the day of eternity.”
In it for them is all that they may desire, and with Us is more than it.
And many a generation We did destroy before them, who exceeded them in strength, therefore venturing in the cities! Is there a place to escape?
Indeed in this is an advice for anyone who keeps a heart, or listens attentively.
And We have indeed created the heavens and the earth, and all what is between them, in six days; and fatigue did not even approach Us.
Therefore (O dear prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him) patiently bear upon what they say, and praising your Lord say His Purity before the sun rises and before the sun sets.
And say His Purity during the night, and after the customary prayers.
And listen attentively on the day when an announcer will proclaim from a place nearby.
The day when all will hear the Scream with the truth; this is the day of coming out of the graves.
Indeed it is We Who give life, and give death, and towards Us only is the return.
On the day when the earth will split for them, so they will come out in haste; this is the gathering – easy for Us.
We well know what they say (O dear Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him), and you are not one to use force over them; therefore advise him with the Qur’an, whoever fears My threat.
