By oath of those which carry away while dispersing.
Then by oath of those which carry the burdens.
Then by oath of those which move with ease.
Then by oath of those which distribute by the command.
Undoubtedly, the promise you are given is surely true.
And undoubtedly justice will surely be done.
And by oath of the decorated heaven.
You are indeed in different opinions regarding this Qur’an.
Only those who are destined to revert, are reverted from it.
Slain be those who mould from their imaginations.
Those who have forgotten in a state of intoxication.
They ask, “When will be the Day of Judgement?”
It will be on the day when they will be roasted in the fire.
And it will be said to them, “Taste your own roasting; this is what you were impatient for.”
Indeed the pious are among Gardens and water springs.
Accepting the rewards given by their Lord; they were indeed virtuous before this.
They used to sleep only a little during the night.
And used to seek forgiveness before dawn.
And the beggar and the destitute had a share in their wealth.
And in the earth are signs for those who are certain.
And in your own selves; so can you not perceive?
And in the heaven lies your sustenance, and the promise you are given.
So by oath of the Lord of the heavens and the earth, this Qur’an is the Truth, in the same language that you speak.
Did the news of Ibrahim’s honourable guests reach you (O dear Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him)?
When they came to him and said, “Peace”; he answered, “Peace”; and thought, “These people are not familiar.”
Then he went to his home – so he brought a healthy calf.
He then presented it before them and said, “Do you not eat?”
He therefore inwardly sensed fear of them; they said, “Do not fear!”; and they gave him the glad tidings of a knowledgeable son.
So his wife came screaming, and striking her forehead cried, “What! For a barren old woman?”
They said, “This is how your Lord has decreed; indeed He only is the Wise, the All Knowing.”
Said Ibrahim, “What is your task, O the sent angels?”
They said, “We have been sent towards a guilty nation.”
“To throw upon them stones of baked clay.”
“That are kept marked, with your Lord, for the transgressors.”
So We removed the people who had faith, from that town.
We therefore found just one house over there that was Muslim.
And We kept a sign remaining in it, for those who fear the painful punishment.
And in Moosa, when We sent him with a clear proof towards Firaun.
In response, he turned away along with his army and said, “He is a magician or a madman.”
We therefore seized him and his army and threw them into the sea, while he was blaming himself.
And in the tribe of A’ad, when we sent a dry windstorm upon them.
It left out nothing in its path, but which it split up into fragments.
And in the tribe of Thamud when it was told to them, “Enjoy for a while.”
In response they rebelled against their Lord’s command, so the thunderbolt seized them whilst they were watching.
So they were neither able to stand up, nor were they able to take revenge.
And before them, We destroyed the people of Nooh; they were indeed a sinning nation.
And We have built the heaven with hands (the Divine Power), and it is We Who give the expanse.
And We made the earth a base, so how well do We lay out!
And We created all things in pairs, so that you may ponder.
“Therefore rush towards Allah; indeed I am from Him, a clear Herald of Warning towards you.”
“And do not appoint other deities along with Allah; indeed I am from Him, a clear Herald of Warning towards you.”
Similarly, whenever a Noble Messenger came to those before them they always said, “He is a magician or a madman.”
What! Have they willed this utterance to one another? In fact they are a rebellious people.
Therefore turn away from them (O dear Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him), – so there is no blame upon you.
And advise, for advice benefits the Muslims.
And I created the jinns and men, only for them to worship Me.
I do not ask any sustenance from them, nor wish that they give Me food.
Indeed it is Allah, Who is the Greatest Sustainer, the Strong, the Able.
And indeed for these unjust is also a turn of punishment, like that of their companions – so they must not ask Me to hasten.
So ruin is for disbelievers, from their day – which they are promised.
