By oath of (mount) Tur.
And by oath of a passage, written –
On an open record.
And by oath of the Inhabited House.
And the lofty roof.
And the sea set aflame.
Indeed your Lord’s punishment will surely take place.
No one can avert it.
A day on which the heavens will shake with a visible shaking.
And the mountains will move with a visible movement.
So on that day, ruin is for those who deny.
Those who are playing in pursuits.
A day when they will be pushed, forcibly shoved towards the fire of hell.
“This is the fire, which you used to deny!”
“So is this magic, or are you unable to see?”
“Enter it – now whether you patiently bear it or are impatient – it is the same for you; for you is a recompense only for what you used to do.”
Indeed the pious are in Gardens and peace.
Delighted at the bestowal of their Lord; and their Lord has saved them from the fire.
“Eat and drink with pleasure, a reward for what you used to do.”
Reclining on thrones, in rows; and We have wedded them to maidens with gorgeous eyes.
And those who accepted faith, and whose descendants followed them with faith – We have joined their descendants with them, and have not reduced anything for them from their deeds; every soul is trapped in its own deeds.
And We aided them with fruit and meat, whatever they desire.
In it, they accept cups from each other, in which is neither any lewdness nor any sin.
And their boy servants shall go around them, as if they were pearls, safely hidden.
And one of them turned towards the other, questioning.
Saying, “Indeed before this, we were in our houses, worried.”
“So Allah did us a great favour, and saved us from the punishment of the flame.”
“Indeed we used to worship Him in our previous life; indeed He only is the Benign, the Most Merciful.”
Therefore (O dear Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him), enlighten, for by the munificence of your Lord, you are neither a soothsayer nor a madman.
Or they allege, “He is a poet – we await a calamity of the times to befall him.”
Proclaim, “Go on waiting – I too am waiting along with you.”
Is this what their senses tell them, or are they a rebellious people?
What! They say, “He has invented the Qur'an”? Rather they do not have faith.
So let them bring a single discourse like it, if they are truthful.
Have they not been created from some source, or are they themselves the creators?
Or did they create the heavens and the earth? Rather they are not certain.
Or do they have the treasures of your Lord, or are they the authority?
Or do they have any stairs, climbing upon which they eavesdrop? So their eavesdropper should bring some clear proof!
What! The daughters for Him, and the sons for you?
Or do you (O dear Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him) ask any fee from them, so they are burdened with the penalty?
Or is the hidden with them, by which they pass judgements?
Or are they planning a conspiracy? So the conspiracy will befall only upon the disbelievers.
Or do they have a God besides Allah? Purity is to Allah from their ascribing of partners to Him.
And were they to see a portion of the sky falling, they will say, “It is a heap of clouds.”
Therefore leave them, until they confront their day, in which they will be stunned.
A day on which their scheming will not benefit them at all, nor will they be helped.
And indeed for the unjust is another punishment before this, but most of them do not know. (Punishment in the grave is proven by this verse.)
And be patient upon your Lord’s command, (O dear Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him), for you are indeed in Our sight; and proclaim the Purity of your Lord while praising Him, whenever you stand.
And proclaim His Purity during the night, and when the stars turn back.
