By oath of the beloved shining star Mohammed (peace and blessings be upon him), when he returned from the Ascent.
Your companion did not err, nor did he go astray.
And he does not say anything by his own desire.
It is but a divine revelation, which is revealed to him.
He has been taught by the Extremely Powerful.
The Strong; then the Spectacle inclined towards him.
And he was on the horizon of the highest heaven.
Then the Spectacle became closer, and came down in full view.
So the distance between the Spectacle and the beloved was only two arms’ length, or even less. (The Heavenly Journey of Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him – was with body and soul.)
So Allah divinely revealed to His bondman, whatever He divinely revealed.
The heart did not deny, what it saw. (The Holy Prophet was bestowed with seeing Allah – see also preceding verses 8, 9, 10.)
What! So do you dispute with him regarding what he saw?
And indeed he did see the Spectacle again.
Near the lote-tree of the last boundary.
Close to which is the Everlasting Paradise.
When the lote-tree was being enveloped, by whatever around it.
The sight did not shift, nor did it cross the limits.
Indeed he saw the supreme signs of his Lord.
So did you observe the idols Lat and Uzza?
And subsequently the third, the Manat?
What! For you the son, and for Him the daughter?
Then that is surely a very unjust distribution!
They are nothing but some names that you have coined, you and your forefathers – Allah has not sent any proof for them; they follow only guesses and their own desires; whereas the guidance from their Lord has come to them.
What! Will man get whatever he dreams of?
So (know that) Allah only is the Owner of all – the Hereafter and this world.
And many an angel is in the heavens, whose intercession does not benefit the least unless Allah gives permission for whomever He wills, and whom He likes.
Indeed those who do not believe in the Hereafter, coin the names of angels like those of females.
And they do not have any knowledge of it; they just follow assumption; and indeed assumption does not serve any purpose in place of the Truth.
Therefore turn away from whoever has turned away from Our remembrance and has desired only the life of this world.
This is the extent of their knowledge; indeed your Lord well knows one who has strayed from His path, and He well knows one who has attained guidance.
And to Allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth, in order to repay those who do evil for what they have done, and give an excellent reward to those who do good.
Those who avoid the cardinal sins and lewdness, except that they approached it and refrained; indeed your Lord’s mercy is limitless; He knows you very well – since He has created you from clay, and when you were foetuses in your mothers’ wombs; therefore do not, on your own, claim yourselves to be clean; He well knows who are the pious.
So did you observe him who turned away?
And he gave a little, then refrained?
Does he have knowledge of the hidden, so he can foresee?
Did not the news reach him, of that which is mentioned in the Books of Moosa?
And of Ibrahim, who was most obedient?
That no burdened soul bears another soul’s burden?
And that man will not obtain anything except what he strove for?
And that his effort will soon be scrutinised?
Then he will be fully repaid for it?
And that the end is only towards your Lord?
And that it is He Who made (you) laugh and made (you) cry?
And that it is He Who gave death and gave life?
And that it is He Who has created the two pairs, male and female?
From a drop of liquid, when it is added?
And that only upon Him is the next revival?
And that it is He Who has given wealth and contentment?
And that He only is the Lord of the star Sirius?
And that it is He Who earlier destroyed the tribe of Aad?
And destroyed the tribe of Thamud, not sparing anyone?
And before them, the people of Nooh? Indeed they were more unjust and more rebellious than these!
And that it is He Who threw down the upturned townships?
So they were covered with whatever covered them?
So O listener! Which favour of your Lord will you doubt?
He (Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him) is a Herald of Warning, like the former Heralds of Warning.
The approaching event has come near.
None except Allah can avert it.
So are you surprised at this fact?
And you laugh, and do not weep!
And you are lost in play!
Therefore prostrate for Allah, and worship Him. (Command of Prostration # 12)
