The Last Day came near, and the moon split apart.
And when they see a sign, they turn away and say, “Just a customary magic!”
And they denied and followed their own desires, whereas each matter has been decided!
And indeed the news which had a lot of deterrence, came to them.
The pinnacle of wisdom – so how will the Heralds of warning provide any benefit?
Therefore turn away from them; on the day when the announcer will call towards a severe unknown matter –
They will come out from the graves with eyes lowered, as if they were spread locusts.
Rushing towards the caller; the disbelievers will say, “This is a tough day.”
Before these, the people of Nooh denied and they belied Our bondman and said, “He is a madman” and rebuffed him.
He therefore prayed to his Lord, “I am overpowered, therefore avenge me.”
We therefore opened the gates of heaven, with water flowing furiously.
And caused springs to gush out from the earth, so that the two waters met totalling a quantity that had been destined.
And We carried Nooh upon a ship of wooden planks and nails.
Sailing in front of Our sight; as a reward for the sake of one who was rejected.
And We left it as a sign – so is there one who would ponder?
So how did My punishment turn out, and My threats?
And We have indeed made the Qur’an easy to memorise, so is there one who would remember?
The tribe of A’ad denied – so how did My punishment turn out, and My warnings?
We indeed sent towards them a severe windstorm, on a day the ill luck of which lasted upon them forever.
Smashing down men as if they were uprooted trunks of date palms.
So how did My punishment turn out, and My warnings?
And We have indeed made the Qur’an easy to memorise, so is there one who would remember?
The tribe of Thamud denied the Noble Messengers.
So they said, “What! Shall we follow a man from among us? If we do, we are indeed astray, and insane!”
“What! Of all the men among us, the remembrance has come down upon him? In fact, he is a mischievous, great liar.”
It was said to Saleh, “They will soon realise tomorrow who is the mischievous great liar.”
“We shall send a she-camel to test them, therefore O Saleh, wait and have patience.”
“And inform them that the water is to be shared between them; only those may come whose turn it is.”
In response they called their companion – he therefore caught and hamstrung the she-camel.
So how did My punishment turn out, and My warnings?
Indeed We sent upon them a single Scream – thereupon they became like the barrier builder’s residual dry trampled hay.
And We have indeed made the Qur’an easy to memorise, so is there one who would remember?
The people of Lut denied the Noble Messengers.
Indeed We sent a shower of stones upon them, except the family of Lut; We rescued them before dawn.
As a reward from Us; this is how We reward one who gives thanks.
And indeed he had warned them of Our seizure – in response they doubted the warnings.
And they tried to persuade him regarding his guests – We therefore blinded their eyes, “So taste My punishment, and My warnings.”
And indeed, the everlasting punishment overcame them early in the morning.
“So taste My punishment, and My warnings!”
And We have indeed made the Qur’an easy to memorise, so is there one who would remember?
And indeed the Noble Messengers came to the people of Firaun.
They denied all Our signs, We therefore seized them – the seizure of the Most Honourable, the All Powerful.
Are your disbelievers better than they were, or have you been given exemption in the Books?
Or they say, “We shall all take revenge as a group.”
The group will soon be routed, and will turn their backs to flee.
In fact their promise is upon the Last Day – and the Last Day is very severe and very bitter!
Indeed the criminals are astray and insane.
On the day when they are dragged upon their faces in the fire – “Taste the heat of hell.”
We have indeed created all things by a proper measure.
And Our command is only a fleeting one – like the batting of an eyelid.
And We have indeed destroyed your kind, so is there one who would ponder?
And all what they did is in the Books.
And every small and great thing is recorded.
Indeed the pious are amidst Gardens and springs.
Seated in an assembly of the Truth, in the presence of Allah, the Omnipotent King.
