When the forthcoming event does occur.
Then none will be able to deny its occurrence.
The event will be abasing some, and exalting some.
When the earth will tremble, shivering.
And the mountains will be crushed, blown to bits.
So they will become like fine dust, scattered in a shaft of light.
And you will become divided into three categories.
So those on the right – how (fortunate) are those on the right!
And those on the left – how (wretched) are those on the left!
And those who surpassed have indeed excelled.
It is they who are the close ones.
They are in Gardens of peace.
A large group from the earlier generations.
And a few from the latter.
On studded thrones.
Reclining on them, facing each other.
Surrounded by immortal boys.
Carrying bowls and pitchers – and cups filled with wine flowing before them.
Their heads shall not ache with it, nor shall they lose their senses.
And fruits that they may like.
And meat of birds that they may wish.
And gorgeous eyed fair maidens.
Like pearls safely hidden.
The reward for what they did.
They will not hear any useless speech in it, or any sin.
Except the saying, “Peace, peace.”
And those on the right – how (fortunate) are those on the right!
Among thorn-less lote-trees.
And clusters of banana plants.
And in everlasting shade.
And in perpetually flowing water.
And plenty of fruits.
That will neither finish, nor ever be stopped.
And raised couches.
We have indeed developed these women with an excellent development.
So made them as maidens.
The beloved of their husbands, of one age.
For those on the right.
A large group from the earlier generations.
And a large group from the latter.
And those on the left – how (wretched) are those on the left!
In scorching wind and boiling hot water.
And in the shadow of a burning smoke.
Which is neither cool nor is for respect.
Indeed they were among favours before this.
And were stubborn upon the great sin (of disbelief).
And they used to say, “When we are dead and have turned into dust and bones, will we surely be raised again?”
“And also our forefathers?”
Proclaim, “Without doubt all – the former and the latter.”
“They will all be gathered together – on the appointed time of the known day.”
Then indeed you, the astray, the deniers –
You will indeed eat from the Zaqqum tree.
Then will fill your bellies with it.
And upon it, you will drink the hot boiling water.
Drinking the way thirsty camels drink.
This is their reception on the Day of Justice.
It is We Who created you, so why do you not accept the truth?
So what is your opinion regarding the semen you discharge?
Do you make a human out of it, or is it We Who create?
It is We Who have ordained death among you, and We have not been beaten –
In the matter of exchanging you for others, and to transform you into what you do not know.
And you have indeed learnt about the first creation, so why do you not ponder?
So what is your opinion regarding what you sow?
Is it you who cultivate it, or is it We Who develop it?
If We will We can make it like dry trampled hay, so you would keep crying out.
That, “We have indeed been penalised!”
“In fact, we were unfortunate!”
So what is your opinion regarding the water that you drink?
Is it you who caused it to descend from the cloud, or is it We Who cause it to descend?
If We will We can make it bitter, so why do you not give thanks?
So what is your opinion regarding the fire which you kindle?
Is it you who grew its tree, or is it We Who create?
We have made it as a reminder of hell and as a utility for travellers in the jungle.
Therefore (O dear Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him) proclaim the Purity of the name of your Lord, the Greatest.
So I swear by the setting places of the stars.
And that is indeed a tremendous oath, if you understand.
This is indeed the noble Qur’an.
Kept in a secure Book.
None may touch it, except with ablution.
Sent down by the Lord Of The Creation.
So is this the matter regarding which you laze?
And you make its denial your share?
So why was it not, when the soul reaches up to the throat, –
Whereas you watch at that moment!
And We are nearer to him than you are, but you cannot see.
So why is it not, that if you are not to be repaid, –
That you bring it back, if you are truthful?
Then if the dying one is of those having proximity, –
Then is relief, and flowers – and Gardens of peace.
And if he is of those on the right, –
Then upon you is the greetings of peace (O dear Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him), from those on the right.
And if he is from the deniers, the astray, –
Then his reception is the hot boiling water.
And a hurling into the blazing fire.
This is indeed an utmost certainty.
Therefore (O dear Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him) proclaim the Purity of the name of your Lord, the Greatest.
