O dear Prophet (Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him)! When you people divorce women, divorce them at the time of their completing the appointed period, and keep count of the appointed period; and fear Allah, your Lord; do not expel them from their houses during the appointed period nor should they leave on their own, unless they bring about some matter of blatant lewdness; and these are the limits of Allah; and whoever crosses Allah’s limits has indeed wronged himself; do you not know, it is likely that Allah may send some new decree after this?
So when they are about to reach their appointed term, hold them back with kindness or separate them with kindness, and make two just men among you as witnesses, and establish the testimony for Allah; with this is advised whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day; and whoever fears Allah – Allah will create for him a way of deliverance.
And will provide him sustenance from a place he had never expected; and whoever relies on Allah – then Allah is Sufficient for him; indeed Allah will accomplish His command; indeed Allah has set a proper measure for all things.
And for those of your women who have no hope of menstruation, if you doubt, the appointed period is three months – and also for those who have not yet had menstruation; and the appointed period for the pregnant women is up to the time they deliver their burden; and whoever fears Allah – Allah will create ease for him in his affairs.
This is Allah’s command that He has sent down towards you; and whoever fears Allah – Allah will relieve his sins and bestow upon him a great reward.
Accommodate them where you also reside, according to your means, and do not harass them to make it difficult upon them; and if they are pregnant, give them the provision till they deliver their burden; then if they suckle the child for you, pay them its due; and consult with each other in a reasonable manner; and if you create hardship for one another, the child will get another breast feeding nurse.
Whoever has the capacity must give provisions according to his means; and the one whose sustenance is restricted upon him, must give provisions from what Allah has given him; Allah does not burden any soul except according to what He has given it; Allah will soon, after the hardship, create ease.
And many a town existed that rebelled against the command of its Lord and His Noble Messengers, so We took a severe account from it – and struck them with a dreadful punishment.
They therefore tasted the evil outcome of their deeds, and the outcome of their deeds was a loss.
Allah has kept prepared a severe punishment for them – therefore fear Allah, O men of intellect! O People who Believe! Allah has sent down a Remembrance (or an honour) for you. (The Holy Prophet is a Remembrance from Allah.)
The Noble Messenger who recites the clear verses of Allah to you, so that he may take those who accept faith and do good deeds, away from the realms of darkness towards light; and whoever accepts faith in Allah and does good deeds, Allah will admit him into Gardens beneath which rivers flow, to abide in them for ever and ever; indeed Allah has kept an excellent sustenance for him.
It is Allah Who has created the seven heavens, and seven earthly worlds like them; the command descends within them, so that you may know that Allah is Able to do all things, and that Allah’s knowledge encompasses everything.
