Most Auspicious is He in Whose control is the entire kingship; and He is Able to do all things.
The One Who created death and life to test you – who among you has the better deeds; and He only is the Most Honourable, the Oft Forgiving.
The One Who created the seven heavens atop each other; do you see any discrepancy in the creation of the Most Gracious? Therefore lift your gaze – do you see any cracks?
Then lift your gaze again, your gaze will return towards you, unsuccessful and weak.
And indeed We have beautified the lower heaven with lamps, and have made them weapons against the devils, and have kept prepared for them the punishment of the blazing fire.
And for those who disbelieved in their Lord, is the punishment of hell; and what a wretched outcome!
They will hear it hissing when they will be thrown into it, and it is boiling.
As if about to explode with rage; whenever a group is thrown into it, the guardians of hell will ask them, “Did not a Herald of Warning come to you?”
They will say, “Yes, why not – indeed a Herald of Warning did come to us – in response we denied and said ‘Allah has not sent down anything – you are not except in a great error’.”
And they will say, “Had we listened or understood, we would not have been among the people of hell.”
So now they admit their sins! Therefore accursed be the people of hell!
Indeed for those who fear their Lord without seeing is forgiveness, and a great reward.
And whether you speak softly or proclaim it aloud; He indeed knows what lies within the hearts!
What! Will He Who has created not know? Whereas He knows every detail, the All Aware!
It is He Who subjected the earth for you, therefore tread its paths and eat from Allah’s sustenance; and towards Him is the resurrection.
Have you become unafraid of the One Who controls the heavens, that He will not cause you to sink into the earth when it trembles?
Or have you become unafraid of the One Who controls the heavens, that He will not send a torrent of stones upon you? So now you will realise, how My warning turned out!
And indeed those before them had denied – therefore how did My rejection turn out!
And did they not see the birds above them, spreading and closing their wings? None except the Most Gracious holds them up; indeed He sees all things.
Or which army do you have that will help you against the Most Gracious? The disbelievers are in nothing except an illusion.
Or who is such that will give you sustenance if Allah stops His sustenance? In fact they persist in rebellion and hatred.
So is one who walks inverted upon his face more rightly guided, or one who walks upright on the Straight Path?
Proclaim (O dear Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him), “It is He Who created you, and made ears and eyes and hearts for you; very little thanks do you offer!”
Say, “It is He Who has spread you out in the earth, and towards Him you will be raised.”
And they say, “When will this promise come, if you are truthful?”
Proclaim, “Surely Allah has its knowledge; and I am only a Herald of plain warning.”
So when they will see it close, the faces of the disbelievers will become ghastly, and it will be declared, “This is what you were demanding.”
Say (O dear Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him), “What is your opinion –Allah may either destroy me and those with me, or have mercy on us – so who is such that will protect the disbelievers from the painful punishment?”
Proclaim, “He only is the Most Gracious – we have accepted faith in Him and have relied only upon Him; so you will now realise who is in open error.”
Say, “What is your opinion – if in the morning all your water were to sink into the earth, then who is such who can bring you water flowing before you?”
