Nuun* – by oath of the pen and by oath of what is written by it. (Alphabet of the Arabic language; Allah and to whomever He reveals, know their precise meanings.)
You are not insane, by the munificence of your Lord.
And indeed for you is an unlimited reward.
And indeed you possess an exemplary character.
So very soon, you will see and they too will realise –
- That who among you was insane.
Indeed your Lord well knows those who have strayed from His path, and He well knows those who are upon guidance.
Therefore do not listen to the deniers.
They wish that in some way you may yield, so they too might soften their stand.
Nor ever listen to any excessive oath maker, ignoble person.
The excessively insulting one, spreader of spite.
One who excessively forbids the good, transgressor, sinner.
Foul mouthed, and in addition to all this, of improper lineage.
Because he* has some wealth and sons. (Walid bin Mugaira, who cursed the Holy Prophet.)
When Our verses are recited to him, he says, “These are stories of earlier people.”
We will soon singe his pig-nose.
We have indeed tested them the way We had tested the owners of the garden when they swore that they would reap its harvest the next morning.
And they did not say, “If Allah wills”.
So an envoy from your Lord completed his round upon the garden, whilst they were sleeping.
So in the morning it became as if harvested.
They then called out to each other at daybreak.
That, “Go to your fields at early morn, if you want to harvest.”
So they went off, while whispering to one another.
“Make sure that no needy person enters your garden this day.”
And they left at early morn, assuming they were in control of their purpose.
Then when they saw it, they said, “We have indeed strayed.”
“In fact, we are unfortunate.”
The best among them said, “Did I not tell you, ‘Why do you not proclaim His purity?’”
They said, “Purity is to our Lord – we have indeed been unjust.”
So they came towards each other, blaming.
They said, “Woe to us – we were indeed rebellious.”
“Hopefully, our Lord will give us a better replacement than this – we now incline towards our Lord.”
Such is the punishment; and indeed the punishment of the Hereafter is the greatest, if only they knew!
Indeed for the pious, with their Lord, are Gardens of Serenity.
Shall We equate the Muslims to the guilty?
What is the matter with you? What sort of a judgement you impose!
Is there a Book for you, from which you read?
- That for you in it is whatever you like?
Or is it that you have a covenant from Us, right up to the Day of Judgement, that you will get all what you claim?
Ask them, who among them is a guarantor for it?
Or is it that they have partners in worship? So they should bring their appointed partners, if they are truthful.
On the day when the Shin* will be exposed and they will be called to prostrate themselves, they will be unable. (Used as a metaphor)
With lowered eyes, disgrace overcoming them; and indeed they used to be called to prostrate themselves whilst they were healthy.
Therefore leave the one who denies this matter, to Me; We shall soon steadily take them away, from a place they do not know.
And I will give them respite; indeed My plan is very solid.
Or is it that you (O dear Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him) ask any fee from them, so they are burdened with the penalty?
Or that they possess the hidden, so they are writing it?
Therefore wait for your Lord’s command, and do not be like the one of the fish; who cried out when he was distraught. (Prophet Yunus – peace be upon him.)
Were it not for his Lord’s favour that reached him, he would have surely been cast onto the desolate land, reproached.
His Lord therefore chose him and made him among those deserving His proximity.
And indeed the disbelievers seem as if they would topple you with their evil gaze when they hear the Qur’an, and they say, “He is indeed insane.”
Whereas it is not but an advice to the entire creation!
