A requester seeks the punishment that will take place –
- Upon the disbelievers – the punishment that none can avert.
From Allah, the Lord of all pinnacles.
The angels and Jibreel, ascend towards Him – the punishment will befall on a day which spans fifty thousand years.
Therefore patiently endure, in the best manner (O dear Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him).
They deem it to be remote.
Whereas We see it impending.
The day when the sky will be like molten silver.
And the hills will be light as wool.
And no friend will ask concerning his friend.
They will be seeing them; the guilty will wish if only he could redeem himself from the punishment of that day, by offering his sons.
And his wife and his brother.
And the family in which he was.
And all those who are in the earth – then only if the redemption saves him!
Never! That is indeed a blazing fire.
A fire that melts the hide.
It calls out to him who reverted and turned away.
And accumulated wealth and hoarded it.
Indeed man is created very impatient, greedy.
Very nervous when touched by misfortune.
And refraining, when good reaches him.
Except those who establish prayer.
Those who are regular in their prayers.
And those in whose wealth exists a recognised right,
For those who beg, and for the needy who cannot even ask.
And those who believe the Day of Judgement to be true.
And those who fear the punishment of their Lord.
Indeed the punishment of their Lord is not a thing to be unafraid of!
And those who protect their private organs (from adultery).
Except with their wives and the bondwomen in their possession, for there is no reproach on them.
So those who desire more than this – it is they who are the transgressors.
And those who protect the property entrusted to them, and their agreements.
And those who are firm upon their testimonies.
And those who protect their prayers.
It is these who will be honoured in Gardens.
So what is the matter with these disbelievers, that they stare at you (O dear Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him)?
From the right and the left, in groups?
Does every man among them aspire to be admitted into the Garden of serenity?
Never! We have indeed created them from a thing they know.
So I swear by the Lord of every East and every West, that We are indeed Able.
To replace them by those better than them; and none can escape from Us.
Therefore leave them, involved in their indecencies and play, till they confront their day which they are promised.
A day when they will come out of the graves in haste, as if rushing towards their goals.
With lowered eyes, disgrace overcoming them; this is the day, which they had been promised.
