Indeed We sent Nooh towards his people saying that, “Warn your people before the painful punishment comes upon them.”
He said, “O my people! I am indeed a Herald of clear warnings to you.”
“That you must worship Allah and fear Him, and obey me.”
“He will forgive you some of your sins, and give you respite up to an appointed term; indeed the promise of Allah cannot be averted when it arrives; if only you knew.”
He said, “My Lord! I invited my people night and day.”
“So for them, my calling them increased their fleeing away.”
“And whenever I called them, so that You may forgive them, they always thrust their fingers into their ears, and covered themselves with their clothes, and remained stubborn and were extremely haughty.”
“I then called them openly.”
“Then I also told them publicly and also spoke to them softly in private.”
“I therefore told them, ‘Seek forgiveness from your Lord; He is indeed Most Forgiving.’
‘He will send down abundant rain for you from the sky.’
‘And will aid you with wealth and sons, and will create gardens for you and cause rivers to flow for you.’
‘What is the matter with you, that you do not desire honour from Allah?’
‘Whereas it is He Who created you in different stages?’
‘Do you not see how Allah has created the seven heavens atop each other?’
‘And in them, has illuminated the moon, and made the sun a lamp?’
‘And it is Allah Who made you grow like vegetation from the earth.’
‘And He will then take you back to it, and again remove you from it.”
‘And it is Allah Who made the earth a bed for you.’
‘So that you may tread the wide roads in it.’”
Prayed Nooh, “O my Lord! They have disobeyed me, and they follow the one whose wealth and children increase nothing for him except ruin.”
“And they carried out a very sinister scheme.”
“And they said, ‘Do not ever abandon your Gods – and never abandon Wadd, or Suwa – or Yaghuth or Yauq or Nasr.’”
“And they have misled a large number; and (I pray that) You increase nothing for the unjust except error.”
Because of their sins they were drowned and then put into the fire; so they did not find any supporter for themselves against Allah. (Punishment in the grave is proven by this verse.)
And prayed Nooh, “O my Lord! Do not leave any of the disbelievers dwelling in the land.”
“Indeed, if You spare them, they will mislead your bondmen – and their descendants, if any, will be none except the wicked, very ungrateful.”
“O my Lord! Forgive me, and my parents, and the believers who are in my house, and all other Muslim men and Muslim women; and do not increase anything for the unjust except ruin.”
