Proclaim (O dear Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him), “I have received the divine revelation that some jinns attentively listened to my recitation, so they said, ‘We have heard a unique Qur’an.’
‘That guides to the path of goodness, we have therefore accepted faith in it; and we shall never ascribe anyone as a partner to our Lord.’
‘And that our Lord’s Majesty is Supreme – He has neither chosen a wife nor a child.’
‘And that the fool among us used to utter false exaggerations against Allah.’
‘Whereas we thought that men and jinns would never fabricate a lie against Allah!’
‘And indeed some men among humans used to take the protection of some men among jinns, so it further increased their haughtiness.’
‘And that they assumed, like you humans assume, that Allah would not send any Noble Messenger.’
‘And we reached the sky, so we found it strongly guarded and filled with comets.’
‘And that we sometimes used to sit in some places in the sky, to listen; so whoever now listens finds a fiery comet waiting for him.’
‘And we do not know whether harm is intended for those on the earth, or whether their Lord intends goodness for them.’
‘And among us some are virtuous and some are the other type; we are split into several branches.’
‘And we are certain that we cannot defeat Allah in the earth, nor can we run out of His grasp.’
‘And that when we heard the guidance, we accepted faith in it; so whoever accepts faith in his Lord, has no fear – neither of any loss nor of any injustice.’
‘And that some among us are Muslims and some are the unjust; and whoever has accepted Islam – it is they who have thought rightly.’
‘And as for the unjust – they are the fuel of hell.’”
And proclaim (O dear Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him), “I have received the divine revelation that ‘Had they remained upright on the straight path, We would have given them abundant water.’
‘In order to test them with it; and whoever turns away from the remembrance of his Lord – He will put him in a punishment that keeps on increasing.’
‘And that the mosques are for Allah only – therefore do not worship anyone along with Allah.’
‘And that when Allah’s bondman stood up to worship Him, the jinns had almost crowded upon him.’”
Say (O dear Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him), “I worship only Allah, and I do not ascribe any partner to Him.”
Proclaim (O dear Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him), “I am not the master of any harm or benefit for you.”
Say, “No one will ever save me from Allah, and other than Him, I will not find any refuge.”
“I only convey the commands from Allah, and His messages; and whoever disobeys the commands of Allah and His Noble Messenger – then indeed for him is the fire of hell, in which they will remain for ever and ever.”
Till the time when they will see what they are promised – so they will now come to know whose aide is weak, and who is lesser in number.
Say (O dear Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him), “I do not know whether what you are promised is close or if my Lord will postpone it for a while.”
The All Knowing of all the hidden does not give anyone the control over His secrets.
Except to His chosen Noble Messengers – so He appoints guards in front and behind him. (Allah gave the knowledge of the hidden to the Holy Prophet – peace and blessings be upon him.)
In order to see that they have conveyed the messages of their Lord – and His knowledge encompasses all whatever they have, and He has kept all things accounted for.
