O the One Wrapped in piety! (Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him)
Stand up for worship during the night, except for some part of it.
For half the night, or reduce some from it.
Or increase a little upon it, and recite the Qur’an slowly in stages.
Indeed We shall soon ordain a heavy responsibility upon you.
Indeed getting up in the night is tougher, and the words flow with strength.
Indeed you have a lot of matters during the day.
And remember the name of your Lord and, leaving others, devote yourself solely to Him.
Lord of the East and Lord of the West – there is no God except Him, therefore make Him your sole Trustee of affairs.
And patiently endure upon what the disbelievers say, and leave them for good.
And leave them to Me – these wealthy deniers – and give them some respite.
Indeed We have heavy fetters and a blazing fire.
And food that chokes, and a painful punishment.
On a day when the earth and the mountains will tremble, and the mountains turn into dunes of flowing sand.
We have indeed sent a Noble Messenger towards you, a present witness over you – the way We had sent a Noble Messenger towards Firaun.
In response Firaun disobeyed the Noble Messenger, so We seized him with a severe seizure.
So how will you save yourselves, if you disbelieve, on a day that will turn children old?
The heaven will split asunder with its grief; the promise of Allah will surely occur.
This is indeed an advice; so whoever wishes may take the path towards his Lord.
Indeed your Lord knows that you stand up in prayer, sometimes almost two-thirds of the night, and sometimes half the night or sometimes a third of it – and also a group of those along with you; Allah keeps measure of the night and day; He knows that you, O Muslims, will not be able to measure the night, so He has inclined towards you with mercy – therefore recite from the Qur’an as much as is easy for you; He knows that soon some of you will fall ill, and some will travel in the land seeking the munificence of Allah, and some will be fighting in Allah’s cause; therefore recite from the Qur’an as much as is easy for you, and establish prayer and pay the obligatory charity, and lend an excellent loan to Allah; and whatever good you send ahead for yourselves, you will find it with Allah, better and having a great reward; and seek forgiveness from Allah; indeed Allah is Oft Forgiving, Most Merciful.
