I swear by the Day of Resurrection.
And by oath of the soul that reproaches itself.
Does man assume that We will never assemble his bones?
Surely yes, why not? We can properly make all his phalanxes.
In fact man wishes to commit evil in front of Him!
He asks, “When will be the Day of Resurrection?”
So when the eyes will be blinded by light.
And the moon will be eclipsed.
And the sun and the moon will be united.
On that day man will cry out, “Where shall I flee?”
Never! There is no refuge!
On that day, the station is only towards your Lord.
On that day, man will be informed of all what he sent ahead and left behind.
In fact, man himself is keeping an eye on his state of affairs!
And even if he presents all the excuses he has, none will be listened to.
O dear Prophet (Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him), do not cause your tongue to move along with the Qur’an in order to learn it faster.
Indeed assembling the Qur’an and reading it are upon Us.
So when We have read it, you should thereupon follow what is read.
Then indeed, to explain its details to you is upon Us.
None except you, O disbelievers – you love what you have, the fleeting one.
And you have forsaken the Hereafter.
On that day, some faces will shine with freshness.
Looking toward their Lord.
And on that day some faces will be ghastly.
Knowing that they will be subjected to a torment that breaks the backs.
Yes indeed, when the soul will reach up to the throat.
And they will say, “Is there any one – any magician?”
And he will realise that this is the parting.
And one shin will curl up with the other shin.
On that day, the herding will be only towards your Lord.
Neither did he believe it to be true, nor did he offer the prayer.
But he denied and turned away.
Then he went back to his home in pride.
Your ruin has come close, still closer.
Again your ruin has come close, still closer.
Does man assume that he will be let loose?
Was he not just a drop of the semen that is discharged?
He then became a clot – so Allah created him, then made him proper.
So created from him a pair, the male and female.
So will He, Who has done all this, not be able to revive the dead?
