Indeed there has been a time for man, when even his name did not exist anywhere.
Indeed We have created man from mixed semen; in order to test him – We therefore made him hearing, knowing.
We have indeed shown him the way – whether he is grateful or ingrate.
We have indeed kept prepared chains, and shackles and a blazing fire for the disbelievers.
Indeed the virtuous will drink from a cup, containing a mixture of Kafoor.
The Kafoor is a spring, from which the chosen bondmen of Allah will drink, causing it to flow wherever they wish inside their palaces.
They fulfil their pledges, and fear a day the evil of which is widespread.
And out of His love, they give food to the needy, the orphan and the prisoner.
They say to them, “We give you food, only for the sake of Allah – we do not seek any reward or thanks from you.”
“Indeed we fear from our Lord a day which is extremely bitter, most severe.”
So Allah saved them from the evil of that day, and gave them freshness and joy.
And gave them Paradise and silk clothes, as a reward for their patience.
Reclining in it, upon thrones; they will not see the hot sunshine in it, nor the bitter cold.
And its shade will cover them, and its fruit clusters brought down low for them.
Rounds of silver cups and silver beakers, looking like glass, will be presented upon them.
Glass made from silver, which the servers have filled up to the measure.
And in Paradise they will be given to drink cups, filled with a mixture of ginger.
Which is a spring in Paradise called Salsabeel.
Immortal youths shall surround them, waiting upon them; when you see them, you would think they are scattered pearls.
And when you look towards it, you will see serenity and a great kingdom.
In it they adorn clothes of fine green silk and gold embroidery; and they are given silver bracelets to wear; and their Lord gave them pure wine to drink.
It will be said to them, “This is your reward – indeed your efforts have been appreciated.”
Indeed We have sent down the Qur’an upon you, in stages.
Therefore stay patient upon your Lord’s command, and do not listen to any of the sinners or ingrates among them.
And remember the name of your Lord morning and evening.
And prostrate for Him in a part of the night, and proclaim His purity into the long night.
Indeed these people love what they have, the fleeting one, and have forsaken the immensely important day behind them.
It is We Who created them, and strengthened their skeleton; and We can replace them with others like them, whenever We will.
This is indeed an advice; so whoever wishes may take the path towards his Lord.
And what will you wish, except if Allah wills; indeed Allah is All Knowing, Wise.
He admits into His mercy, whomever He wills; and for the unjust He has kept prepared a painful punishment.
