By oath of those that are sent, one after the other. (The verses of the Holy Qur’an or the angels or the winds).
Then by oath of those that push with a strong gust.
Then by oath of those that lift and carry.
Then by those that clearly differentiate the right and wrong.
And then by those that instil Remembrance into the hearts.
To complete the argument or to warn.
Indeed what you are promised, will surely befall.
So when the lights of the stars are put out.
And when the sky is split apart.
And when the mountains are made into dust and blown away.
And when the time of the Noble Messengers arrives.
For which day were they appointed?
For the Day of Decision.
And what do you know, what the Day of Decision is!
Ruin is for the deniers on that day!
Did We not destroy the earlier people?
We shall then send the latter after them.
This is how We deal with the guilty.
Ruin is for the deniers on that day!
Did We not create you from an abject fluid?
We then kept it in a safe place.
For a known calculated term.
We then calculated; so how excellently do We control!
Ruin is for the deniers on that day!
Did We not make the earth a storehouse?
For the living and the dead among you?
And We placed high mountains as anchors in it and gave you sweet water to drink.
Ruin is for the deniers on that day!
“Move towards what you used to deny!”
“Move towards the shadow of the smoke having three branches.”
“Which neither gives shade, nor saves from the flame.”
Indeed hell throws up sparks like huge castles.
Seeming like yellow camels.
Ruin is for the deniers on that day!
This is a day in which they will not be able to speak.
Nor will they be given permission to present excuses.
Ruin is for the deniers on that day!
This is the Day of Decision; We have gathered you and all the earlier men.
If you now have any conspiracy, carry it out on Me.
Ruin is for the deniers on that day!
Indeed the pious are in shade and springs.
And among fruits whichever they may desire.
“Eat and drink with pleasure, the reward of your deeds.”
This is how We reward the virtuous.
Ruin is for the deniers on that day!
“Eat and enjoy for a while – indeed you are guilty.”
Ruin is for the deniers on that day!
And when it is said to them, “Offer the prayer” – they do not!
Ruin is for the deniers on that day!
So after this, in what matter will they believe?
