What are they questioning each other about?
About the great tidings!
Regarding which they hold different views.
Surely yes, they will soon come to know!
Again surely yes, they will soon come to know!
Did We not make the earth a bed?
And the mountains as pegs?
And it is We who created you in pairs.
And made your sleep a rest.
And made the night a cover.
And made the day for seeking livelihood.
And built seven strong roofs above you.
And have kept a very bright lamp in it.
And then sent down hard rain from the water bearing clouds.
In order to produce grain and plants with it.
And dense gardens.
Indeed the Day of Decision is a time fixed.
The day when the Trumpet will be blown – you will therefore come forth in multitudes.
And the heaven will be opened – it therefore becomes like gates.
And the mountains will be moved – they will therefore become like mirages.
Indeed hell is lying in ambush.
The destination of the rebellious.
They will remain in it for ages.
They will neither taste anything cool in it, nor anything to drink.
Except hot boiling water and hot pus discharged from the people of hell.
The reward to each is according to what he is.
Indeed they had no fear of the account.
And they denied Our signs to the extreme.
And We have kept recorded everything in a Book, accounted for.
Therefore taste it now – We shall not increase anything for you except the punishment.
Indeed the place of success is for the pious.
Gardens and grapes.
And maidens of a single age.
And an overflowing cup.
In which they shall neither hear lewd talk, nor any lie.
A reward from your Lord – a grossly sufficient bestowal.
Lord of the heavens and the earth, and all whatever is between them – the Most Gracious – with Whom no one will have the right to talk.
The day when Jibreel and all the angels will stand in rows; none will be able to speak except one whom the Most Gracious commands and who spoke rightly. (Prophet Mohammed – peace and blessings be upon him – will be the first to be granted permission to intercede.)
That is the True Day; therefore whoever wills may take the path towards his Lord.
We warn you of a punishment that has come near; a day on which man will see what his own hands have sent ahead, and the disbeliever will say, “Alas – if only I were dust!”
