Ha'. Mim.
By the Clear Book.
We revealed it on a Blessed Night, for We were intent on warning;
(We revealed it on the Night) wherein every matter is wisely determined
by Our command. Verily, We were set to send a Messenger
as a Mercy from your Lord. Surely He is All-Hearing, All-Seeing,
the Lord of the heavens and the earth and of all that is between them: if you would only have sure faith.
There is no god but He: He gives life and causes death. He is your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers of yore.
(But the fact is, they lack certainty) and frolic about in doubt.
So watch for the Day when the sky will come down with a pall of smoke,
enveloping people. That will be a grievous scourge.
(People will then say): “Our Lord, remove this scourge from us; we shall believe.”
But how will they take heed? Such are they that a Messenger came to them clearly expounding the Truth,
yet they turned away from him and said: “This is a well-tutored madman.”
Yet We will hold the scourge back for a while, (but no sooner than We will do so) you will revert to your old ways.
The Day when We shall seize them with a mighty seizing, that will be the Day on which We shall inflict upon you full retribution.
Indeed before that We subjected the Pharaonites to the same test. A noble Messenger came to them
(and said): “Deliver to me Allah's servants. I am a trustworthy Messenger to you,
and do not exalt yourselves in defiance of Allah. I have come to you with a clear authority (as a Messenger).
I have taken refuge with my Lord and your Lord lest you should attack me with stones.
But if you do not believe what I say, leave me alone (and desist from laying hands on me).”
Then he called upon his Lord: “These are a criminal people.”
(He was told): “Set out with My servants by night for you will certainly be pursued.
And leave the sea behind you as calm as ever. Surely they are an army that is doomed to be drowned.”
How many gardens did they leave behind, and how many fountains
and sown fields and splendid mansions,
and the life of ease in which they took delight!
Thus it was; and We made another people inherit all that.
Then neither the sky shed tears over them nor the earth. They were granted no respite.
Thus did We deliver the Children of Israel from the humiliating chastisement,
from Pharaoh who was most prominent among the prodigals.
We knowingly exalted them (i.e., the Children of Israel) above other peoples of the world
and bestowed upon them the Signs wherein lay an evident test for them.
Indeed these people say:
“This is our first and only death, and we shall never be raised again.
Bring back to us our fathers if you are truthful.”
Are these better or the people of Tubba and those who went before them? We destroyed them for they were a criminal people.
It was not in idle sport that We created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them.
We did not create them except in Truth. But most of them do not know.
The Day of Final Decision is the appointed time for all;
the Day when a friend shall be of no avail to his friend nor shall they be helped,
except those to whom Allah shows mercy. He is the Most Mighty, the Most Compassionate.
The tree of al-Zaqqum
shall be the food of the sinful.
Like dregs of oil, it will boil in their bellies
like boiling water.
“Seize him and drag him to the middle of the Blazing Fire,
then pour boiling water over his head as chastisement.
Taste this, you are a person mighty and noble!
This is what you used to doubt.”
Verily the God-fearing shall be in a secure place
amidst gardens and springs.
Attired in silk and brocade, they shall be arrayed face to face.
Thus shall it be: and We shall espouse them to fair, wide-eyed maidens.
While resting in security, they shall call for all kinds of fruit.
They shall not taste death except the death in this world. And Allah will save them from the chastisement of Hell
as a favour from your Lord. That is the great triumph.
(O Prophet), We have made this Book easy in your tongue so that they may take heed.
Wait, then; they too are waiting.
