Qaf. By the glorious Qur'an.
Nay; they wondered that a warner should have come to them from among themselves. The unbelievers said: “This indeed is a strange thing.
What! When we are dead and reduced to mere dust, (shall we be raised to life)? Such a return is far-fetched.”
(Thus do they imagine, although) We know well what the earth takes away from them. With Us is a Record that preserves everything.
They gave the lie to the Truth when it came to them. So they are now in a state of great perplexity.
Did they never observe the sky above them: how We built it and beautified it; and it has no cracks;
and We have spread out the earth, and have set upon it firm mountains, and have caused it to bring out plants of all beauteous kinds?
All these are to serve as eye openers and as a lesson to every being who is prone to turn (to the Truth).
We also sent down blessed water from the heaven, wherewith We caused gardens and harvest-grain to grow,
and tall palm-trees with their thickly-clustered spathes;
all this as sustenance for Our servants. And thus We do bring the dead land back to life with water. Such shall be the coming forth (of human beings from the earth).
In the past Noah's people, and the people of Rass and Thamud gave the lie (to Messengers),
and so did 'Ad, and Pharaoh and Lot's brethren,
and the people of Aykah, and the people of Tubba'. They all gave the lie to the Messengers. Thereafter My threat of chastisement against them was fulfilled.
Did We, then, become worn out by the first creation? Not at all; but they are in doubt about a fresh creation.
Surely We have created man, and We know the promptings of his heart, and We are nearer to him than even his jugular vein.
Moreover, there are two scribes, one each sitting on the right and the left, recording everything.
He utters not a word, but there is a vigilant watcher at hand.
Lo, the agony of death has indeed come with the Truth. That is what you had sought to avoid.
And then the Trumpet was blown. This is the day of the promised chastisement.
Everyone has come, each attended by one who will drive him on, and another who will bear witness.
You were heedless of this. Now We have removed your veil and so your vision today is sharp.
His companion said: “Here is he who was in my charge.”
The command was given: “Cast into Hell every hardened, stubborn unbeliever,
who hinders good, exceeds the limits, is immersed in doubts,
and has set up another deity with Allah. Hurl him into the grievous torment.”
His companion said: “I did not incite him to rebel; he was far gone into error of his own accord.”
(It was said): “Do not remonstrate in My presence. I had warned you.
My Word is not changed; and never do I inflict the least wrong upon My servants.”
On that Day We shall ask Hell: “Are you full?” And it will reply: “Are there any more?”
And when Paradise shall be brought close to the God-fearing, and will no longer be far away,
it will be said: “This is what you were promised, a promise made to everyone who turned much (to Allah) and was watchful of his conduct,
to everyone who feared the Merciful One though He is beyond the reach of perception, to everyone who has come with a heart ever wont to turn (to Him).
Enter this Paradise in peace.” That will be the Day of Eternity.
Therein they shall get whatever they desire; and with Us there is even more.
How many a nation did We destroy before them that were stronger in prowess than these. They searched about the lands of the world. But could they find a refuge?
Verily there is a lesson in this for everyone who has a (sound) heart and who listens with an attentive mind.
We created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days, and weariness did not even touch Us.
Hence bear with patience whatever they say, and celebrate your Lord's glory before the rising of the sun and before its setting;
and in the night, too, celebrate His glory, in the wake of prostration.
Hearken on the Day when the caller will call from a place nearby,
the Day when they shall hear the Blast in truth. That will be the Day (for the dead) to come forth.
Surely it is We Who give life and cause death, and to Us shall all return
on the Day when the earth will be rent asunder and people, rising from it, will hasten forth. To assemble them all will be easy for Us.
(O Prophet), We are well aware of what they say; and you are not required to force things on them. So exhort with the Qur'an all those who fear My warning.
