By the winds which scatter dust,
which carry clouds laden with water,
which then smoothly speed along,
and execute the great task of apportioning (rainfall):
surely what you are being warned against is true,
and the Judgement shall doubtlessly take place.
By the heaven with its numerous forms:
surely you are at variance (about the Hereafter);
though only those who are averse to the Truth will turn away from (believing in it).
Doomed are the conjecturers
who are steeped in ignorance and heedlessness.
They ask: “When will the Day of Judgement be?”
It will be the Day when they shall be scourged by the Fire
(and be told): “Taste your ordeal! This is what you were seeking to hasten.”
As for the God-fearing, they shall be in the midst of gardens and fountains,
joyously receiving what their Lord will have granted them. Verily they did good works before (the coming of this Day):
they used to sleep but little by night,
and would ask for forgiveness at dawn,
and in their wealth there was a rightful share for him who would ask and for the destitute.
There are many Signs on earth for those of sure faith,
and also in your own selves. Do you not see?
And in heaven is your provision and also what you are being promised.
So, by the Lord of the heaven and the earth, this is certainly true, as true as the fact of your speaking.
(O Prophet), did the story of Abraham's honoured guests reach you?
When they came to him, they said: “Peace”; he said: “Peace also be to you; (you seem to be) a group of strangers.”
Then he went back to his family and brought a fat roasted calf
and laid it before them, saying: “Will you not eat?”
Then he became afraid of them. They said: “Fear not,” and announced to him the good news of (the birth of) a boy endowed with knowledge.
So hearing his wife went forth shouting. She struck her face and exclaimed: “A barren old woman am I.”
They said: “So has your Lord said (that you shall have a boy). Surely He is Most Wise, All-Knowing.”
Abraham said: “Envoys (of Allah), what is your errand?”
They replied: “Behold, we have been sent to a wicked people
that we may unleash a shower of clay-stones
marked by your Lord upon those who go beyond the limits.”
Then We evacuated there from all the believers
– and We did not find there any, apart from a single house of Muslims –
and We left therein a Sign for those who fear the grievous chastisement.
There is also a Sign for you in the story of Moses when We sent him with a clear authority to Pharaoh.
But Pharaoh turned away, showing arrogance on account of his power, and said (about Moses): “He is either a sorcerer or a madman.”
So We seized him and his hosts, and cast them into the sea. He became an object of much blame.
There is also a Sign for you in (the story of) Ad, when We let loose upon them an ominous wind
that left nothing that it came upon without reducing it to rubble.
There is also a Sign for you in (the story of) Thamud. They were told: “Enjoy yourselves for a while.”
But they brazenly disobeyed their Lord's command, and then a sudden chastisement overtook them while they looked on.
They were unable even to stand up or protect themselves.
Before all these We destroyed the people of Noah: they were a wicked people.
And heaven – We made it with Our Own Power and We have the Power to do so.
And the earth – We spread it out, and how well have We smoothed it!
And of everything We have created pairs; perhaps you will take heed.
Flee, therefore, to Allah. Surely I am a clear warner to you from Him;
and do not set up any deity with Allah. Surely I am a clear warner to you from Him.
Thus has it been (in the past): never did a Messenger come to the nations that preceded them but they said: “(He is) a sorcerer, or a mad-man.”
Have they arrived at a common understanding concerning this? No; but they are a people given to transgression.
So turn your attention away from them; you shall incur no blame.
Do, however, keep exhorting them; for exhortation benefits those endowed with faith.
I created the jinn and humans for nothing else but that they may serve Me;
I desire from them no provision, nor do I want them to feed Me.
Surely Allah is the Bestower of all provision, the Lord of all power, the Strong.
The wrong-doers shall receive a portion of the chastisements as their fellows (of yore). So let them not rush Me.
Woe, then, betide those who disbelieved in that Day of theirs which they are being asked to hold in dread.
