The Hour of Resurrection drew near and the moon split asunder.
(Regardless of any Signs these people see), they turn away and say: “This is an ongoing sorcery.”
They also gave the lie to (the splitting asunder of the moon) and only followed their desires. Yet everything is destined to reach an end.
Surely there came to them narratives (of the ancient nations) that should suffice to deter (them from transgression),
narratives that are full of consummate wisdom. But warnings do not avail them.
So turn away from them, (O Prophet). On the Day when a caller shall call them to a thing most terrible,
with down-cast eyes they shall go forth from their graves, as though they were scattered locusts.
They shall be hurrying forth towards the caller, and the unbelievers (who had once denied this Day), will say: “This is a woeful Day.”
Before them Noah's people also gave the lie (to his Message). They rejected Our servant as a liar, saying: “He is a madman”; and he was rebuffed.
Then he called upon His Lord: “Verily I am vanquished; so come You to my aid.”
Thereupon We opened the gates of the sky for water to pour down,
and We made the earth burst forth with springs, and all this water converged to fulfil that which had been decreed.
And We bore Noah on the vessel built of planks and nails,
which sailed on under Our supervision: a reward for him who had been shown ingratitude.
And We left the Ark as a Sign. Is there, then, any who will take heed?
So how awesome were My chastisement and My warnings!
We have made this Qur'an easy as a reminder. Is there, then, any who will take heed?
'Ad also gave the lie (to Hud). So how awesome were My chastisement and My warnings!
We sent a tumultuous wind against them on a day of unremitting misfortune,
which tore people away and hurled them as though they were trunks of uprooted palm-trees.
So how awesome were My chastisement and My warnings!
We have made the Qur'an easy to derive lessons from. Is there, then, any who will take heed?
Thamud gave the lie to the warnings,
saying: “Are we to follow a single mortal, one from among ourselves? If we do that, we shall surely be in error and folly.
Was there none but he to whom the Reminder could be vouchsafed excluding all others? Nay; he is an insolent liar.”
(We told Our Messenger): “Tomorrow they shall know who is the insolent liar.
We shall send the she-camel as a trial for them; so watch their end with patience.
Let them know that the water should be divided between them and the she-camel, each availing their turn.”
Eventually, they summoned their companion, and he undertook the (outrageous) task and hamstrung the she-camel.
So how awesome were My chastisement and My warnings!
Behold, We sent a single Blast against them, and they became like the trampled twigs of a sheep pen-builder.
Surely We have made this Qur'an easy as a reminder. Is there, then, any who will take heed?
Lot's people also gave the lie to the warnings,
and behold, We let loose upon them a tempest which rained stones upon them, except upon Lot's household whom We rescued in the last hours of the night
as a favour from Us. Thus do We reward those who give thanks.
Surely Lot warned his people that We shall seize them (with Our chastisement), but they doubted the warnings.
Then they even solicited his guests from him, whereupon We blotted out their eyes, (telling them): “Now have a taste of My chastisement and My warnings.”
Indeed an abiding chastisement came upon them in the morning.
So have a taste of My chastisement and My warnings.
Surely We have made this Qur'an easy as a reminder. Is there, then, any who will take heed?
Warnings also came to the Pharaonites,
but they gave the lie to Our Signs, to all of them. Thereupon We seized them with the seizing of the Most Mighty, the Most Powerful.
Are your unbelievers (of Makkah) any better than they? Or have you been granted any immunity in the Scriptures?
Or do they say: “We are a strong legion, strong enough for victory?”
Soon shall this legion be routed and shall turn their backs and flee.
Nay; the Hour of Doom is their appointed time, and the Hour shall be more calamitous and bitter.
The evil-doers are victims of error and madness.
There shall come a Day when they will be dragged on their faces into the Fire and will be told: “Now taste the flame of Hell.”
We have created everything in a determined measure.
Our command consists of only one Word which is carried out in the twinkling of an eye.
We did indeed destroy many like you. Is there, then, any who will heed?
All their deeds are recorded in the Scrolls;
everything large or small, is duly inscribed.
Surely those who shun disobedience will dwell amidst Gardens and running streams
where they will be honourably seated in the presence of a King, Mighty in Power.
