By the (winds) sent forth in quick succession,
which then blow tempestuously
and raise (clouds) and scatter them around,
then winnow them thoroughly,
and then cast (Allah's) remembrance (in people's hearts),
to serve as an excuse or a warning.
Surely what you are promised shall come to pass.
So when the stars are extinguished,
and the sky is rent asunder,
and the mountains are blown away,
and the appointed time to bring the Messengers together arrives, (then shall the promised event come to pass).
To which Day has this task been deferred?
To the Day of Judgement.
What do you know what the Day of Judgement is?
Woe on that Day to those that give the lie to the Truth!
Did We not destroy many a nation of the earlier times?
And We shall cause those of later times to follow them.
Thus do We deal with the guilty.
Woe on that Day to those that give the lie to the Truth!
Did We not create you of a mean fluid,
which We then placed in a secure repository
until an appointed time?
See that We had the power to do so. Great indeed is Our power to do what We will.
Woe on that Day to those that give the lie to the Truth!
Did We not make the earth a receptacle,
for the living and the dead,
and did We not firmly fix towering mountains on it and give you sweet water to drink?
Woe on that Day to those that give the lie to the Truth!
Proceed now towards that which you were wont to deny as false;
proceed towards the three-pronged shadow,
which neither provides (cooling) shade nor protection against the flames;
it indeed throws up sparks like castles,
which seem as though they are yellow-coloured camels.
Woe on that Day to those that give the lie to the Truth!
That will be the Day on which they will not (be able to) utter a word,
nor will they be allowed to proffer excuses.
Woe on that Day to those that give the lie to the Truth!
That is the Day of Judgement on which We have assembled you as well as all those who went before you.
So if you have any ploy, try it against Me!
Woe on that Day to those that give the lie to the Truth!
Behold, today the God-fearing will be amidst shades and springs,
and the fruits that they desire (will be ready at hand).
Eat and drink and may every joy attend you as a reward for your deeds.
Thus do We reward those that do good.
Woe on that Day to those that give the lie to the Truth!
Eat and enjoy yourselves for a while. Surely you are evil-doers.
Woe on that Day to those that give the lie to the Truth!
When it is said to them: “Bow down (before Allah),” they do not bow down.
Woe on that Day to those that give the lie to the Truth!
In what discourse after this (Qur'an) will they, then, believe?
