About what are they asking one another?
Is it about the awesome tiding
that they are in utter disagreement?
No indeed; soon will they come to know;
again, no indeed; soon will they come to know.
Have We not spread the earth like a bed,
and fixed the mountains like pegs,
and created you in pairs (as men and women),
and made your sleep a means of repose,
and made the night a covering,
and made the day to seek livelihood,
and built above you seven strong firmaments,
and placed therein a hot, shining lamp,
and sent down abundant water from the clouds
so that We may thereby bring forth grain and vegetation,
and gardens dense with foliage?
Surely the Day of Judgement has an appointed time;
the Day when the Trumpet shall be blown, and you will come forth in multitudes;
and when the sky shall be opened up and will become all doors;
and the mountains will be set in motion and become a mirage.
Surely the Hell is an ambush,
a resort for the rebellious;
therein they shall abide for ages,
they shall taste in it no coolness, nor any pleasant drink
save boiling water and wash of the wounds;
a befitting recompense for their deeds.
For indeed they did not look forward to any reckoning,
and roundly denied Our Signs as false.
And everything have We recorded in a Book.
So taste (the fruit of your deeds). We shall only increase your torment.
Surely the state of triumph awaits the God-fearing:
gardens and vineyards,
and youthful maidens of like age,
and an overflowing cup.
Therein they shall hear no idle talk, nor any falsehood;
a recompense from your Lord and an ample reward
from the Lord of the heavens and the earth and of that which is between them; the Most Merciful Lord before Whom none dare utter a word.
The Day when the Spirit and the angels are ranged row on row. None shall speak save he whom the Merciful Lord will permit; and he too will speak what is right.
That Day is sure to come. So let him who will seek a resort with his Lord.
Lo! We warn you of a chastisement near at hand; the Day when a man will look on what his own hands have sent forth, and the unbelievers shall say: “Oh would that I were utter dust.”
