1. Alif-Lam-Ra.(These letters are one of the miracles of the Quran, and none but Allah (Alone) knows their meanings).(This is) a Book which We have revealed unto you (O Muhammad SAW) in order that you might lead mankind out of darkness (of disbelief and polytheism) into light (of belief in the Oneness of Allah and Islamic Monotheism) by their Lords Leave to the Path of the All-Mighty, the Owner of all Praise.
2. Allah to Whom belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth! And woe unto the disbelievers from a severe torment.
3. Those who prefer the life of this world instead of the Hereafter, and hinder (men) from the Path of Allah (i.e.Islam) and seek crookedness therein - They are far astray.
4. And We sent not a Messenger except with the language of his people, in order that he might make (the Message) clear for them. Then Allah misleads whom He wills and guides whom He wills. And He is the All-Mighty, the All-Wise.
5. And indeed We sent Moosa (Moses) with Our Ayat (signs, proofs, and evidences) (saying): "Bring out your people from darkness into light, and make them remember the annals of Allah. Truly, therein are evidences, proofs and signs for every patient, thankful (person)."
6. And (remember) when Moosa (Moses) said to his people: "Call to mind Allahs Favour to you, when He delivered you from Firauns (Pharaoh) people who were afflicting you with horrible torment, and were slaughtering your sons and letting your women alive, and in it was a tremendous trial from your Lord."
7. And (remember) when your Lord proclaimed: "If you give thanks (by accepting Faith and worshipping none but Allah), I will give you more (of My Blessings), but if you are thankless (i.e.disbelievers), verily! My Punishment is indeed severe."
8. And Moosa (Moses) said: "If you disbelieve, you and all on earth together, then verily! Allah is Rich (Free of all wants), Owner of all Praise."
9. Has not the news reached you, of those before you, the people of Nooh (Noah), and Ad, and Thamud?And those after them? None knows them but Allah. To them came their Messengers with clear proofs,but they put their hands in their mouths (biting them from anger) and said: "Verily, we disbelieve in that with which you have been sent, and we are really in grave doubt as to that to which you invite us (i.e.Islamic Monotheism)."
10. Their Messengers said: "What! Can there be a doubt about Allah, the Creator of the heavens and the earth? He calls you (to Monotheism and to be obedient to Allah) that He may forgive you of your sins and give you respite for a term appointed." They said: "You are no more than human beings like us! You wish to turn us away from what our fathers used to worship. Then bring us a clear authority i.e. a clear proof of what you say)."
11. Their Messengers said to them: "We are no more than human beings like you, but Allah bestows His Grace to whom He wills of His slaves. It is not ours to bring you an authority (proof) except by the Permission of Allah. And in Allah (Alone) let the believers put their trust.
12. "And why should we not put our trust in Allah while He indeed has guided us our ways. And we shall certainly bear with patience all the hurt you may cause us, and in Allah (Alone) let those who trust,put their trust."
13. And those who disbelieved, said to their Messengers: "Surely, we shall drive you out of our land, or you shall return to our religion." So their Lord inspired them: "Truly, We shall destroy the Zalimoon (polytheists, disbelievers and wrong-doers.).
14. "And indeed, We shall make you dwell in the land after them. This is for him who fears standing before Me (on the Day of Resurrection or fears My Punishment) and also fears My Threat."
15. But they (the Messengers) sought victory and help (from their Lord (Allah)), and every obstinate,arrogant dictator (who refuses to believe in the Oneness of Allah) was brought to a complete loss and destruction.
16. In front of him (every obstinate, arrogant dictator) is Hell, and he will be made to drink boiling,festering water.
17. He will sip it unwillingly, and he will find a great difficulty to swallow it down his throat, and death will come to him from every side, yet he will not die and in front of him, will be a great torment.
18. The parable of those who disbelieve in their Lord is that their works are as ashes, on which the wind blows furiously on a stormy day, they shall not be able to get aught of what they have earned. That is the straying, far away (from the Right Path).
19. Do you not see that Allah has created the heavens and the earth with truth? If He will, He can remove you and bring (in your place) a new creation!
20. And for Allah that is not hard or difficult (i.e. very easy for Allah).
21. And they all shall appear before Allah (on the Day of Resurrection) then the weak will say to those who were arrogant (chiefs): "Verily, we were following you; can you avail us anything from Allahs Torment?" They will say: "Had Allah guided us, we would have guided you. It makes no difference to us (now) whether we rage, or bear (these torments) with patience, there is no place of refuge for us."
22. And Shaitan (Satan) will say when the matter has been decided: "Verily, Allah promised you a promise of truth. And I too promised you, but I betrayed you. I had no authority over you except that I called you, so you responded to me. So blame me not, but blame yourselves. I cannot help you, nor can you help me. I deny your former act in associating me (Satan) as a partner with Allah (by obeying me in the life of the world). Verily, there is a painful torment for the Zalimoon (polytheists and wrong-doers,etc.)."
23. And those who believed (in the Oneness of Allah and His Messengers and whatever they brought)and did righteous deeds, will be made to enter Gardens under which rivers flow, - to dwell therein forever (i.e.in Paradise), with the permission of their Lord. Their greeting therein will be: Salam (peace!).
24. See you not how Allah sets forth a parable? - A goodly word as a goodly tree, whose root is firmly fixed, and its branches (reach) to the sky (i.e. very high).
25. Giving its fruit at all times, by the Leave of its Lord and Allah sets forth parables for mankind in order that they may remember.
26. And the parable of an evil word is that of an evil tree uprooted from the surface of earth having no stability.
27. Allah will keep firm those who believe, with the word that stands firm in this world (i.e. they will keep on worshipping Allah Alone and none else), and in the Hereafter. And Allah will cause to go astray those who are Zalimoon (polytheists and wrong-doers, etc.), and Allah does what He wills.
28. Have you not seen those who have changed the Blessings of Allah into disbelief (by denying Prophet Muhammad SAW and his Message of Islam), and caused their people to dwell in the house of destruction?
29. Hell, in which they will burn, - and what an evil place to settle in!
30. And they set up rivals to Allah, to mislead (men) from His Path! Say: "Enjoy (your brief life)! But certainly, your destination is the (Hell) Fire!"
31. Say (O Muhammad SAW) to Ibadee (My slaves) who have believed, that they should perform AsSalat (Iqamat-as-Salat), and spend in charity out of the sustenance We have given them, secretly and openly, before the coming of a Day on which there will be neither mutual bargaining nor befriending.
32. Allah is He Who has created the heavens and the earth and sends down water (rain) from the sky,and thereby brought forth fruits as provision for you; and He has made the ships to be of service to you,that they may sail through the sea by His Command; and He has made rivers (also) to be of service to you.
33. And He has made the sun and the moon, both constantly pursuing their courses, to be of service to you; and He has made the night and the day, to be of service to you.
34. And He gave you of all that you asked for, and if you count the Blessings of Allah, never will you be able to count them. Verily! Man is indeed an extreme wrong-doer, - a disbeliever (an extreme ingrate,denies Allahs Blessings by disbelief, and by worshipping others besides Allah, and by disobeying Allah and His Prophet Muhammad SAW).
35. And (remember) when Ibrahim (Abraham) said: "O my Lord! Make this city (Makkah) one of peace and security, and keep me and my sons away from worshipping idols.
36. "O my Lord! They have indeed led astray many among mankind. But whoso follows me, he verily is of me. And whoso disobeys me, - still You are indeed Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.
37. "O our Lord! I have made some of my offspring to dwell in an uncultivable valley by Your Sacred House (the Kabah at Makkah); in order, O our Lord, that they may perform As-Salat (Iqamat-as-Salat),so fill some hearts among men with love towards them, and (O Allah) provide them with fruits so that they may give thanks.
38. "O our Lord! Certainly, You know what we conceal and what we reveal. Nothing on the earth or in the heaven is hidden from Allah.
39. "All the praises and thanks be to Allah, Who has given me in old age Ismail (Ishmael) and Ishaque (Isaac). Verily! My Lord is indeed the All-Hearer of invocations.
40. "O my Lord! Make me one who performs As-Salat (Iqamat-as-Salat), and (also) from my offspring,our Lord! And accept my invocation.
41. "Our Lord! Forgive me and my parents, and (all) the believers on the Day when the reckoning will be established."
42. Consider not that Allah is unaware of that which the Zalimoon (polytheists, wrong-doers, etc.) do,but He gives them respite up to a Day when the eyes will stare in horror.
43. (They will be) hastening forward with necks outstretched, their heads raised up (towards the sky),their gaze returning not towards them and their hearts empty (from thinking because of extreme fear).
44. And warn (O Muhammad SAW) mankind of the Day when the torment will come unto them; then the wrong-doers will say: "Our Lord! Respite us for a little while, we will answer Your Call and follow the Messengers!" (It will be said): "Had you not sworn aforetime that you would not leave (the world for the Hereafter).
45. "And you dwelt in the dwellings of men who wronged themselves, and it was clear to you how We had dealt with them. And We put forth (many) parables for you."
46. Indeed, they planned their plot, and their plot was with Allah, though their plot was a great (one,still) it would never be able to remove the mountains (real mountains or the Islamic law) from their places (as it is of no importance) (Tafsir Ibn Kathir, Vol. 2, Page 597). (It is said by some interpreters regarding this Verse that the Quraish pagans plotted against Prophet Muhammad SAW to kill him but they failed and were unable to carry out their plot which they plotted).
47. So think not that Allah will fail to keep His Promise to His Messengers. Certainly, Allah is AllMighty, - All-Able of Retribution.
48. On the Day when the earth will be changed to another earth and so will be the heavens, and they (all creatures) will appear before Allah, the One, the Irresistible.
49. And you will see the Mujrimoon (criminals, disbelievers in the Oneness of Allah Islamic Monotheism, polytheists, disobedient to Allah, etc.) that Day bound together in fetters; (Muqarranoon in fetters; mean:- with their hands and feet tied to their necks with chains.)
50. Their garments will be of pitch, and fire will cover their faces.
51. That Allah may requite each person according to what he has earned. Truly, Allah is Swift at reckoning.
52. This (Quran) is a Message for mankind (and a clear proof against them), in order that they may be warned thereby, and that they may know that He is the only One Ilah (God - Allah) - (none has the right to be worshipped but Allah), and that men of understanding may take heed