1. TaSeenMeem (These letters are one of the miracles of the Quran, and none but Allah (Alone) knows their meanings)
2. These are Verses of the manifest Book (that makes clear truth from falsehood, good from evil, etc.).
3. We recite to you some of the news of Moosa (Moses) and Firaun (Pharaoh) in truth, for a people who believe (those who believe in this Quran, and in the Oneness of Allah).
4. Verily, Firaun (Pharaoh) exalted himself in the land and made its people sects, weakening (oppressing) a group (i.e. Children of Israel) among them, killing their sons, and letting their females live. Verily, he was of the Mufsidoon (i.e. those who commit great sins and crimes, oppressors, tyrants,etc.).
5. And We wished to do a favour to those who were weak (and oppressed) in the land, and to make them rulers and to make them the inheritors,
6. And to establish them in the land, and We let Firaun (Pharaoh) and Haman and their hosts receive from them that which they feared.
7. And We inspired the mother of Moosa (Moses), (saying): "Suckle him (Moosa (Moses)), but when you fear for him, then cast him into the river and fear not, nor grieve. Verily! We shall bring him back to you, and shall make him one of (Our) Messengers."
8. Then the household of Firaun (Pharaoh) picked him up, that he might become for them an enemy and a (cause of) grief. Verily! Firaun (Pharaoh), Haman and their hosts were sinners.
9. And the wife of Firaun (Pharaoh) said: "A comfort of the eye for me and for you. Kill him not,perhaps he may be of benefit to us, or we may adopt him as a son." And they perceive not (the result of that).
10. And the heart of the mother of Moosa (Moses) became empty (from every thought, except the thought of Moosa (Moses)). She was very near to disclose his (case, i.e. the child is her son), had We not strengthened her heart (with Faith), so that she might remain as one of the believers.
11. And she said to his (Musas (Moses)) sister: "Follow him." So she (his sister) watched him from a far place secretly, while they perceived not.
12. And We had already forbidden (other) foster suckling mothers for him, until she (his sister came up and) said: "Shall I direct you to a household who will rear him for you, and sincerely they will look after him in a good manner?"
13. So did We restore him to his mother, that she might be delighted, and that she might not grieve, and that she might know that the Promise of Allah is true. But most of them know not.
14. And when he attained his full strength, and was perfect (in manhood), We bestowed on him Hukman (Prophethood, right judgement of the affairs) and religious knowledge (of the religion of his forefathers i.e. Islamic Monotheism). And thus do We reward the Muhsinoon (i.e. good doers - see the footnote of V.9:120).
15. And he entered the city at a time of unawareness of its people, and he found there two men fighting,- one of his party (his religion - from the Children of Israel), and the other of his foes. The man of his (own) party asked him for help against his foe, so Moosa (Moses) struck him with his fist and killed him. He said: "This is of Shaitans (Satan) doing, verily, he is a plain misleading enemy."
16. He said: "My Lord! Verily, I have wronged myself, so forgive me." Then He forgave him. Verily,He is the Oft-Forgiving, the Most Merciful.
17. He said: "My Lord! For that with which You have favoured me, I will never more be a helper for the Mujrimoon (criminals, disobedient to Allah, polytheists, sinners, etc.)!"
18. So he became afraid, looking about in the city (waiting as to what will be the result of his crime of killing), when behold, the man who had sought his help the day before, called for his help (again).Moosa (Moses) said to him: "Verily, you are a plain misleader!"
19. Then when he decided to seize the man who was an enemy to both of them, the man said: "O Moosa (Moses)! Is it your intention to kill me as you killed a man yesterday? Your aim is nothing but to become a tyrant in the land, and not to be one of those who do right."
20. And there came a man running, from the farthest end of the city. He said: "O Moosa (Moses)!Verily, the chiefs are taking counsel together about you, to kill you, so escape.Truly, I am to you of those who give sincere advice."
21. So he escaped from there, looking about in a state of fear. He said: "My Lord! Save me from the people who are Zalimoon (polytheists and wrong-doers)!"
22. And when he went towards (the land of) Madyan (Midian) he said: "It may be that my Lord guides me to the Right Way."
23. And when he arrived at the water of Madyan (Midian) he found there a group of men watering (their flocks), and besides them he found two women who were keeping back (their flocks). He said: "What is the matter with you?" They said: "We cannot water (our flocks) until the shepherds take (their flocks).And our father is a very old man."
24. So he watered (their flocks) for them, then he turned back to shade, and said: "My Lord! Truly, I am in need of whatever good that You bestow on me!"
25. Then there came to him one of the two women, walking shyly. She said: "Verily, my father calls you that he may reward you for having watered (our flocks) for us." So when he came to him and narrated the story, he said: "Fear you not. You have escaped from the people who are Zalimoon (polytheists,disbelievers, and wrong-doers)."
26. And said one of them (the two women): "O my father! Hire him! Verily, the best of men for you to hire is the strong, the trustworthy."
27. He said: "I intend to wed one of these two daughters of mine to you, on condition that you serve me for eight years, but if you complete ten years, it will be (a favour) from you. But I intend not to place you under a difficulty. If Allah will, you will find me one of the righteous."
28. He (Moosa (Moses)) said: "That (is settled) between me and you whichever of the two terms I fulfill,there will be no injustice to me, and Allah is Surety over what we say."
29. Then, when Moosa (Moses) had fulfilled the term, and was travelling with his family, he saw a fire in the direction of Toor (Mount). He said to his family: "Wait, I have seen a fire; perhaps I may bring to you from there some information, or a burning fire-brand that you may warm yourselves."
30. So when he reached it (the fire), he was called from the right side of the valley, in the blessed place from the tree: "O Moosa (Moses)! Verily! I am Allah, the Lord of the Alameen (mankind, jinns and all that exists)!
31. "And throw your stick!" But when he saw it moving as if it were a snake, he turned in flight, and looked not back. (It was said): "O Moosa (Moses)! Draw near, and fear not. Verily, you are of those who are secure.
32. "Put your hand in your bosom, it will come forth white without a disease, and draw your hand close to your side to be free from fear (that which you suffered from the snake, and also by that your hand will return to its original state). these are two Burhan (signs, miracles, evidences, proofs) from your Lord to Firaun (Pharaoh) and his chiefs. Verily, they are the people who are Fasiqoon (rebellious, disobedient to Allah).
33. He said: "My Lord! I have killed a man among them, and I fear that they will kill me.
34. "And my brother Haroon (Aaron) he is more eloquent in speech than me so send him with me as a helper to confirm me. Verily! I fear that they will belie me."
35. Allah said: "We will strengthen your arm through your brother, and give you both power, so they shall not be able to harm you, with Our Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.),you two as well as those who follow you will be the victors."
36. Then when Moosa (Moses) came to them with Our Clear Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons,signs, revelations, etc.), they said: "This is nothing but invented magic. Never did we hear of this among our fathers of old."
37. Moosa (Moses) said: "My Lord knows best him who came with guidance from Him, and whose will be the happy end in the Hereafter. Verily, the Zalimoon (wrong-doers, polytheists and disbelievers in the Oneness of Allah) will not be successful."
38. Firaun (Pharaoh) said: "O chiefs! I know not that you have an ilah (a god) other than me, so kindle for me (a fire), O Haman, to bake (bricks out of) clay, and set up for me a Sarhan (a lofty tower, or palace, etc.) in order that I may look at (or look for) the Ilah (God) of Moosa (Moses); and verily, I think that he (Moosa (Moses)) is one of the liars."
39. And he and his hosts were arrogant in the land, without right, and they thought that they would never return to Us.
40. So We seized him and his hosts, and We threw them all into the sea (and drowned them). So behold (O Muhammad SAW) what was the end of the Zalimoon (wrong-doers, polytheists and those who disbelieved in the Oneness of their Lord (Allah), or rejected the advice of His Messenger Moosa (Moses) ).
41. And We made them leaders inviting to the Fire, and on the Day of Resurrection, they will not be helped.
42. And We made a curse to follow them in this world, and on the Day of Resurrection, they will be among Al-Maqbuhoon (those who are prevented to receive Allahs Mercy or any good, despised or destroyed, etc.).
43. And indeed We gave Moosa (Moses), after We had destroyed the generations of old, the Scripture (the Taurat (Torah)) as an enlightenment for mankind, and a guidance and a mercy, that they might remember (or receive admonition).
44. And you (O Muhammad SAW) were not on the western side (of the Mount), when We made clear to Moosa (Moses) the commandment, and you were not among those present.
45. But We created generations (after generations i.e. after Moosa (Moses) ), and long were the ages that passed over them. And you (O Muhammad SAW) were not a dweller among the people of Madyan (Midian), reciting Our Verses to them. But it is We Who kept sending (Messengers).
46. And you (O Muhammad SAW) were not at the side of the Toor (Mount) when We did call, (it is said that Allah called the followers of Muhammad SAW, and they answered His Call, or that Allah called Moosa (Moses)). But (you are sent) as a mercy from your Lord, to give warning to a people to whom no warner had come before you, in order that they may remember or receive admonition. (Tafsir AtTabaree, Vol. 20, Page 81).
47. And if (We had) not (sent you to the people of Makkah) in case a calamity should seize them for (the deeds) that their hands have sent forth, they should have said: "Our Lord! Why did You not send us a Messenger? We should then have followed Your Ayat (Verses of the Quran) and should have been among the believers."
48. But when the truth (i.e. Muhammad SAW with his Message) has come to them from Us, they say:"Why is he not given the like of what was given to Moosa (Moses)? Did they not disbelieve in that which was given to Moosa (Moses) of old? They say: "Two kinds of magic (the Taurat (Torah) and the Quran) each helping the other!" And they say: "Verily! In both we are disbelievers."
49. Say (to them, O Muhammad SAW): "Then bring a Book from Allah, which is a better guide than these two (the Taurat (Torah) and the Quran), that I may follow it, if you are truthful."
50. But if they answer you not (i.e. do not believe in your doctrine of Islamic Monotheism, nor follow you), then know that they only follow their own lusts. And who is more astray than one who follows his own lusts, without guidance from Allah? Verily! Allah guides not the people who are Zalimoon (wrongdoers, disobedient to Allah, and polytheists).
51. And indeed now We have conveyed the Word (this Quran in which is the news of everything to them), in order that they may remember (or receive admonition).
52. Those to whom We gave the Scripture (i.e. the Taurat (Torah) and the Injeel (Gospel), etc.) before it,- they believe in it (the Quran).
53. And when it is recited to them, they say: "We believe in it. Verily, it is the truth from our Lord.Indeed even before it we have been from those who submit themselves to Allah in Islam as Muslims (like Abdullah bin Salam and Salman Al-Farisee, etc.).
54. These will be given their reward twice over, because they are patient, and repel evil with good, and spend (in charity) out of what We have provided them.
55. And when they hear AlLaghw (dirty, false, evil vain talk), they withdraw from it and say: "To us our deeds, and to you your deeds. Peace be to you. We seek not the ignorant."
56. Verily! You (O Muhammad SAW) guide not whom you like, but Allah guides whom He wills. And He knows best those who are the guided.
57. And they say: "If we follow the guidance with you, we would be snatched away from our land."Have We not established for them a secure sanctuary (Makkah), to which are brought fruits of all kinds,a provision from Ourselves, but most of them know not.
58. And how many a town (population) have We destroyed, which were thankless for its means of livelihood (disobeyed Allah, and His Messengers, by doing evil deeds and crimes) ! And those are their dwellings, which have not been inhabited after them except a little. And verily! We have been the inheritors.
59. And never will your Lord destroy the towns (populations) until He sends to their mother town a Messenger reciting to them Our Verses. And never would We destroy the towns unless the people thereof are Zalimoon (polytheists, wrong-doers, disbelievers in the Oneness of Allah, oppressors and tyrants).
60. And whatever you have been given is an enjoyment of the life of (this) world and its adornment, and that (Hereafter) which is with Allah is better and will remain forever. Have you then no sense?
61. Is he whom We have promised an excellent promise (Paradise), which he will find true, like him whom We have made to enjoy the luxuries of the life of (this) world, then on the Day of Resurrection,he will be among those brought up (to be punished in the Hell-fire)?
62. And (remember) the Day when He will call to them, and say: "Where are My (so-called) partners whom you used to assert?"
63. Those about whom the Word will have come true (to be punished) will say: "Our Lord! These are they whom we led astray. We led them astray, as we were astray ourselves. We declare our innocence (from them) before You. It was not us they worshipped."
64. And it will be said (to them): "Call upon your (so-called) partners (of Allah), and they will call upon them, but they will give no answer to them, and they will see the torment. (They will then wish) if only they had been guided!
65. And (remember) the Day (Allah) will call to them, and say: "What answer gave you to the Messengers?"
66. Then the news of a good answer will be obscured to them on that day, and they will not be able to ask one another.
67. But as for him who repented (from polytheism and sins, etc.), believed (in the Oneness of Allah, and in His Messenger Muhammad SAW), and did righteous deeds (in the life of this world), then he will be among those who are successful.
68. And your Lord creates whatsoever He wills and chooses, no choice have they (in any matter).Glorified be Allah, and exalted above all that they associate as partners (with Him).
69. And your Lord knows what their breasts conceal, and what they reveal.
70. And He is Allah; La ilaha illa Huwa (none has the right to be worshipped but He). His is all praise,in the first (i.e. in this world) and in the last (i.e.in the Hereafter). And for Him is the Decision, and to Him shall you (all) be returned.
71. Say (O Muhammad SAW): "Tell me! If Allah made night continuous for you till the Day of Resurrection, who is an ilah (a god) besides Allah who could bring you light? Will you not then hear?"
72. Say (O Muhammad SAW): "Tell me! If Allah made day continuous for you till the Day of Resurrection, who is an ilah (a god) besides Allah who could bring you night wherein you rest? Will you not then see?"
73. It is out of His Mercy that He has put for you night and day, that you may rest therein (i.e. during the night) and that you may seek of His Bounty (i.e. during the day), and in order that you may be grateful.
74. And (remember) the Day when He (your Lord Allah) will call them (those who worshipped others along with Allah), and will say: "Where are My (so-called) partners, whom you used to assert?"
75. And We shall take out from every nation a witness, and We shall say: "Bring your proof." Then they shall know that the truth is with Allah (Alone), and the lies (false gods) which they invented will disappear from them.
76. Verily, Qaroon (Korah) was of Moosas (Moses) people, but he behaved arrogantly towards them.And We gave him of the treasures, that of which the keys would have been a burden to a body of strong men. When his people said to him: "Do not be glad (with ungratefulness to Allahs Favours). Verily!Allah likes not those who are glad (with ungratefulness to Allahs Favours).
77. But seek, with that (wealth) which Allah has bestowed on you, the home of the Hereafter, and forget not your portion of legal enjoyment in this world, and do good as Allah has been good to you, and seek not mischief in the land. Verily, Allah likes not the Mufsidoon (those who commit great crimes and sins,oppressors, tyrants, mischief-makers, corrupts).
78. He said: "This has been given to me only because of knowledge I possess." Did he not know that Allah had destroyed before him generations, men who were stronger than him in might and greater in the amount (of riches) they had collected. But the Mujrimoon (criminals, disbelievers, polytheists,sinners, etc.) will not be questioned of their sins (because Allah knows them well, so they will be punished without account).
79. So he went forth before his people in his pomp. Those who were desirous of the life of the world,said: "Ah, would that we had the like of what Qaroon (Korah) has been given? Verily! He is the owner of a great fortune."
80. But those who had been given (religious) knowledge said: "Woe to you! The Reward of Allah (in the Hereafter) is better for those who believe and do righteous good deeds, and this none shall attain except those who are patient (in following the truth)."
81. So We caused the earth to swallow him and his dwelling place. Then he had no group or party to help him against Allah, nor was he one of those who could save themselves.
82. And those who had desired (for a position like) his position the day before, began to say: "Know you not that it is Allah Who enlarges the provision or restricts it to whomsoever He pleases of His slaves.Had it not been that Allah was Gracious to us, He could have caused the earth to swallow us up (also)!Know you not that the disbelievers will never be successful.
83. That home of the Hereafter (i.e. Paradise), We shall assign to those who rebel not against the truth with pride and oppression in the land nor do mischief by committing crimes. And the good end is for the Muttaqoon (pious - see V.2:2).
84. Whosoever brings good (Islamic Monotheism along with righteous deeds), he shall have the better thereof, and whosoever brings evil (polytheism along with evil deeds) then, those who do evil deeds will only be requited for what they used to do.
85. Verily, He Who has given you (O Muhammad SAW) the Quran (i.e. ordered you to act on its laws and to preach it to others) will surely bring you back to the Maad (place of return, either to Makkah or to Paradise after your death, etc.). Say (O Muhammad SAW): "My Lord is Aware of him who brings guidance, and he who is in manifest error."
86. And you were not expecting that the Book (this Quran) would be sent down to you, but it is a mercy from your Lord. So never be a supporter of the disbelievers.
87. And let them not turn you (O Muhammad SAW) away from (preaching) the Ayat (revelations and verses) of Allah after they have been sent down to you, and invite (men) to (believe in) your Lord (i.e: in the Oneness (Tauheed) of Allah (1) Oneness of the Lordship of Allah; (2) Oneness of the worship of Allah; (3) Oneness of the Names and Qualities of Allah), and be not of Al-Mushrikoon (those who associate partners with Allah, e.g. polytheists, pagans, idolaters, those who disbelieve in the Oneness of Allah and deny the Prophethood of Messenger Muhammad SAW).
88. And invoke not any other ilah (god) along with Allah, La ilaha illa Huwa (none has the right to be worshipped but He). Everything will perish save His Face. His is the Decision, and to Him you (all)shall be returned