1. AlifLamMeem. (These letters are one of the miracles of the Quran, and none but Allah (Alone) knows their meanings.)
2. These are Verses of the Wise Book (the Quran).
3. A guide and a mercy for the Muhsinoon (gooddoers)
4. Those who perform AsSalat (Iqamatas- Salat) and give Zakat and they have faith in the Hereafter with certainty.
5. Such are on guidance from their Lord, and such are the successful.
6. And of mankind is he who purchases idle talks (i.e.music, singing, etc.) to mislead (men) from the Path of Allah without knowledge, and takes it (the Path of Allah, the Verses of the Quran) by way of mockery. For such there will be a humiliating torment (in the Hell-fire).
7. And when Our Verses (of the Quran) are recited to such a one, he turns away in pride, as if he heard them not, as if there were deafness in his ear. So announce to him a painful torment.
8. Verily, those who believe (in Islamic Monotheism) and do righteous good deeds, for them are Gardens of delight (Paradise).
9. To abide therein. It is a Promise of Allah in truth. And He is the AllMighty, the AllWise.
10. He has created the heavens without any pillars, that you see and has set on the earth firm mountains,lest it should shake with you. And He has scattered therein moving (living) creatures of all kinds. And We send down water (rain) from the sky, and We cause (plants) of every goodly kind to grow therein.
11. This is the creation of Allah. So show Me that which those (whom you worship), besides Him have created. Nay, the Zalimoon (polytheists, wrongdoers and those who do not believe in the Oneness of Allah) are in plain error.
12. And indeed We bestowed upon Luqman AlHikmah (wisdom and religious understanding, etc.)saying: "Give thanks to Allah," and whoever gives thanks, he gives thanks for (the good of) his ownself.And whoever is unthankful, then verily, Allah is AllRich (Free of all wants), Worthy of all praise.
13. And (remember) when Luqman said to his son when he was advising him: "O my son! Join not in worship others with Allah. Verily! Joining others in worship with Allah is a great Zoolm (wrong)indeed.
14. And We have enjoined on man (to be dutiful and good) to his parents. His mother bore him in weakness and hardship upon weakness and hardship, and his weaning is in two years give thanks to Me and to your parents, unto Me is the final destination.
15. But if they (both) strive with you to make you join in worship with Me others that of which you have no knowledge, then obey them not, but behave with them in the world kindly, and follow the path of him who turns to Me in repentance and in obedience. Then to Me will be your return, and I shall tell you what you used to do.
16. "O my son! If it be (anything) equal to the weight of a grain of mustard seed, and though it be in a rock, or in the heavens or in the earth, Allah will bring it forth. Verily, Allah is Subtle (in bringing out that grain), WellAware (of its place).
17. "O my son! AqimisSalat (perform AsSalat), enjoin (people) for AlMaroof (Islamic Monotheism and all that is good), and forbid (people) from AlMunkar (i.e. disbelief in the Oneness of Allah, polytheism of all kinds and all that is evil and bad), and bear with patience whatever befall you. Verily! These are some of the important commandments ordered by Allah with no exemption.
18. "And turn not your face away from men with pride, nor walk in insolence through the earth. Verily,Allah likes not each arrogant boaster.
19. "And be moderate (or show no insolence) in your walking, and lower your voice. Verily, the harshest of all voices is the voice (braying) of the ass."
20. See you not (O men) that Allah has subjected for you whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth, and has completed and perfected His Graces upon you, (both) apparent (i.e Islamic Monotheism, and the lawful pleasures of this world, including health, good looks, etc.) and hidden (i.e.Ones Faith in Allah (of Islamic Monotheism) knowledge, wisdom, guidance for doing righteous deeds,and also the pleasures and delights of the Hereafter in Paradise, etc.)? Yet of mankind is he who disputes about Allah without knowledge or guidance or a Book giving light!
21. And when it is said to them: "Follow that which Allah has sent down", they say: "Nay, we shall follow that which we found our fathers (following)." (Would they do so) even if Shaitan (Satan) invites them to the torment of the Fire.
22. And whosoever submits his face (himself) to Allah (i.e.(follows Allahs Religion of Islamic Monotheism), worships Allah (Alone) with sincere Faith in the (1) Oneness of His Lordship,(2) Oneness of His worship, and (3) Oneness of His Names and Qualities), while he is a Muhsin (gooddoer i.e.performs good deeds totally for Allahs sake without any show-off or to gain praise or fame etc. and does them in accordance with the Sunnah of Allahs Messenger Muhammad SAW), then he has grasped the most trustworthy handhold (La ilaha ill-Allah (none has the right to be worshipped but Allah)). And to Allah return all matters for decision.
23. And whoever disbelieved, let not his disbelief grieve you (O Muhammad SAW),. to Us is their return, and We shall inform them what they have done. Verily, Allah is the AllKnower of what is in the breasts (of men).
24. We let them enjoy for a little while, then in the end We shall oblige them to (enter) a great torment.
25. And if you (O Muhammad SAW) ask them: "Who has created the heavens and the earth," they will certainly say: "Allah." Say: "All the praises and thanks be to Allah!" But most of them know not.
26. To Allah belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth. Verily, Allah, He is AlGhanee (Rich,Free of all wants), Worthy of all praise.
27. And if all the trees on the earth were pens and the sea (were ink wherewith to write), with seven seas behind it to add to its (supply), yet the Words of Allah would not be exhausted. Verily, Allah is AllMighty, AllWise.
28. The creation of you all and the resurrection of you all are only as (the creation and resurrection of) a single person. Verily, Allah is AllHearer, AllSeer.
29. See you not (O Muhammad SAW) that Allah merges the night into the day (i.e. the decrease in the hours of the night are added in the hours of the day), and merges the day into the night (i.e. the decrease in the hours of day are added in the hours of night), and has subjected the sun and the moon, each running its course for a term appointed; and that Allah is AllAware of what you do.
30. That is because Allah, He is the Truth, and that which they invoke besides Him is AlBatil (falsehood, Satan and all other false deities), and that Allah, He is the Most High, the Most Great.
31. See you not that the ships sail through the sea by Allahs Grace? that He may show you of His Signs?Verily, in this are signs for every patient, grateful (person).
32. And when a wave covers them like shades (i.e. like clouds or the mountains of seawater), they invoke Allah, making their invocations for Him only. But when He brings them safe to land, there are among them those that stop in the middle, between (Belief and disbelief). But none denies Our Signs except every perfidious ungrateful.
33. O mankind! Be afraid of your Lord (by keeping your duty to Him and avoiding all evil), and fear a Day when no father can avail aught for his son, nor a son avail aught for his father. Verily, the Promise of Allah is true, let not then this (worldly) present life deceive you, nor let the chief deceiver (Satan)deceive you about Allah.
34. Verily, Allah! With Him (Alone) is the knowledge of the Hour, He sends down the rain, and knows that which is in the wombs. No person knows what he will earn tomorrow, and no person knows in what land he will die. Verily, Allah is AllKnower, AllAware (of things)