1. Sad (These letters (Sad etc.) are one of the miracles of the Quran and none but Allah (Alone) knows their meanings). By the Quran full of reminding.
2. Nay, those who desbelieve are in false pride and opposition.
3. How many a generation We have destroyed before them, and they cried out when there was no longer time for escape!
4. And they (Arab pagans) wonder that a warner (Prophet Muhammad SAW) has come to them from among themselves! And the disbelievers say: "This (Prophet Muhammad SAW) is a sorcerer, a liar.
5. "Has he made the aliha (gods) (all) into One Ilah (God - Allah). Verily, this is a curious thing!"
6. And the leaders among them went about (saying): "Go on, and remain constant to your aliha (gods)!Verily, This is a thing designed (against you)!
7. "We have not heard (the like) of this among the people of these later days. This is nothing but an invention!
8. "Has the Reminder been sent down to him (alone) from among us?" Nay! but they are in doubt about My Reminder (this Quran)! Nay, but they have not tasted (My) Torment!
9. Or have they the treasures of the Mercy of your Lord, the All-Mighty, the Real Bestower?
10. Or is it that the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them is theirs? If so, let them ascend up with means (to the heavens)!
11. (As they denied Allahs Message) they will be a defeated host like the confederates of the old times (who were defeated).
12. Before them (were many who) belied Messengers, the people of Nooh (Noah); and Ad; and Firaun (Pharaoh) the man of stakes (with which he used to punish the people),
13. And Thamood, and the people of Lout (Lot), and the dwellers of the wood; such were the confederates.
14. Not one of them but belied the Messengers, therefore My Torment was justified,
15. And these only wait for a single Saihah (shout (i.e. the blowing of the Trumpet by the angel Israfil Sarafil)) there will be no pause or ending thereto (till everything will perish except Allah (the only God full of Majesty, Bounty and Honour)).
16. They say: "Our Lord! Hasten to us Qittana (i.e. our Record of good and bad deeds so that we see it)before the Day of Reckoning!"
17. Be patient (O Muhammad SAW) of what they say, and remember Our slave Dawood (David),endued with power. Verily, he was ever oft-returning in all matters and in repentance (toward Allah).
18. Verily, We made the mountains to glorify Our Praises with him (Dawood (David)) in the Ashi (i.e.after the mid-day till sunset) and Ishraq (i.e. after the sunrise till mid-day).
19. And (so did) the birds assembled: all with him (Dawood (David)) did turn (to Allah i.e. glorified His Praises).
20. We made his kingdom strong and gave him Al-Hikmah (Prophethood, etc.) and sound judgement in speech and decision.
21. And has the news of the litigants reached you? When they climbed over the wall into (his) Mihrab (a praying place or a private room,).
22. When they entered in upon Dawood (David), he was terrified of them, they said: "Fear not! (We are)two litigants, one of whom has wronged the other, therefore judge between us with truth, and treat us not with injustice, and guide us to the Right Way.
23. Verily, this my brother (in religion) has ninety nine ewes, while I have (only) one ewe, and he says:"Hand it over to me, and he overpowered me in speech."
24. (Dawood (David)) said (immediately without listening to the opponent): "He has wronged you in demanding your ewe in addition to his ewes. And, verily, many partners oppress one another, except those who believe and do righteous good deeds, and they are few." And Dawood (David) guessed that We have tried him and he sought Forgiveness of his Lord, and he fell down prostrate and turned (to Allah) in repentance.
25. So We forgave him that, and verily, for him is a near access to Us, and a good place of (final) return (Paradise).
26. O Dawood (David)! Verily! We have placed you as a successor on earth, so judge you between men in truth (and justice) and follow not your desire for it will mislead you from the Path of Allah. Verily!Those who wander astray from the Path of Allah (shall) have a severe torment, because they forgot the Day of Reckoning.
27. And We created not the heaven and the earth and all that is between them without purpose! That is the consideration of those who disbelieve! Then woe to those who disbelieve (in Islamic Monotheism)from the Fire!
28. Shall We treat those who believe (in the Oneness of Allah Islamic Monotheism) and do righteous good deeds, as Mufsidoon (those who associate partners in worship with Allah and commit crimes) on earth? Or shall We treat the Muttaqoon (pious - see V.2:2), as the Fujjar (criminals, disbelievers,wicked, etc)?ONT>
29. (This is) a Book (the Quran) which We have sent down to you, full of blessings that they may ponder over its Verses, and that men of understanding may remember.
30. And to Dawood (David) We gave Sulaiman (Solomon). How excellent (a) slave! Verily, he was ever oft-returning in repentance (to Us)!
31. When there were displayed before him, in the afternoon, well trained horses of the highest breed (for Jihad (holy fighting in Allahs Cause)).
32. And he said: "Alas! I did love the good (these horses) instead of remembering my Lord (in my Asr prayer)" till the time was over, and (the sun) had hidden in the veil (of night).
33. Then he said "Bring them (horses) back to me." Then he began to pass his hand over their legs and their necks (till the end of the display).
34. And, indeed We did try Sulaiman (Solomon) and We placed on his throne Jasadan (a devil, so he lost his kingdom for a while) but he did return (to his throne and kingdom by the Grace of Allah and he did return) to Allah with obedience and in repentance.
35. He said: "My Lord! Forgive me, and bestow upon me a kingdom such as shall not belong to any other after me: Verily, You are the Bestower."
36. So, We subjected to him the wind, it blew gently to his order whithersoever he willed,
37. And also the Shayatin (devils) from the jinns (including) every kind of builder and diver,
38. And also others bound in fetters.
39. (Saying of Allah to Sulaiman (Solomon)): "This is Our gift, so spend you or withhold, no account will be asked."
40. And verily, he enjoyed a near access to Us, and a good final return (Paradise).
41. And remember Our slave Ayoob (Job), when he invoked his Lord (saying): "Verily! Shaitan (Satan)has touched me with distress (by losing my health) and torment (by losing my wealth)!
42. (Allah said to him): "Strike the ground with your foot: This is a spring of water to wash in, cool and a (refreshing) drink."
43. And We gave him (back) his family, and along with them the like thereof, as a Mercy from Us, and a Reminder for those who understand.
44. "And take in your hand a bundle of thin grass and strike therewith (your wife), and break not your oath . Truly! We found him patient. How excellent (a) slave! Verily, he was ever oft-returning in repentance (to Us)!
45. And remember Our slaves, Ibrahim (Abraham), Ishaque (Isaac), and Yaqoob (Jacob), (all) owners of strength (in worshipping Us) and (also) of religious understanding.
46. Verily, We did choose them by granting them (a good thing, i.e.) the remembrance of the home (in the Hereafter and they used to make the people remember it, and also they used to invite the people to obey Allah and to do good deeds for the Hereafter).
47. And they are with Us, verily, of the chosen and the best!
48. And remember Ismail (Ishmael), AlYasaa (Elisha), and Dhul-Kifl (Isaiah), all are among the best.
49. This is a Reminder, and verily, for the Muttaqoon (pious and righteous persons - see V.2:2) is a good final return (Paradise), -,
50. Adn (Edn) Paradise (everlasting Gardens), whose doors will be open for them, (It is said (in Tafsir At-Tabaree, Part 23, Page 174) that one can speak to the doors, just one tells it to open and close, and it will open or close as it is ordered).
51. Therein they will recline; therein they will call for fruits in abundance and drinks;
52. And beside them will be chaste females (virgins) restraining their glances only for their husbands,(and) of equal ages.
53. This it is what you (Al-Muttaqoon - the pious) are promised for the Day of Reckoning!
54. (It will be said to them)! Verily, this is Our Provision which will never finish;
55. This is so! And for the Taghoon (transgressors, disobedient to Allah and His Messenger disbelievers in the Oneness of Allah, criminals, etc.), will be an evil final return (Fire),
56. Hell! Where they will burn, and worst (indeed) is that place to rest!
57. This is so! Then let them taste it, a boiling fluid and dirty wound discharges.
58. And other torments of similar kind, all together!
59. This is a troop entering with you (in Hell), no welcome for them! Verily, they shall burn in the Fire!
60. (The followers of the misleaders will say): "Nay, you (too)! No welcome for you! It is you (misleaders) who brought this upon us (because you misled us in the world), so evil is this place to stay in!"
61. They will say: "Our Lord! Whoever brought this upon us, add to him a double torment in the Fire!"
62. And they will say: "What is the matter with us that we see not men whom we used to count among the bad ones?"
63. Did we take them as an object of mockery, or have (our) eyes failed to perceive them?"
64. Verily, that is the very truth, the mutual dispute of the people of the Fire!
65. Say (O Muhammad SAW): "I am only a warner and there is no Ilah (God) except Allah (none has the right to be worshipped but Allah) the One, the Irresistible,
66. "The Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, the All-Mighty, the OftForgiving."
67. Say: "That (this Quran) is a great news,
68. "From which you turn away!
69. "I had no knowledge of the chiefs (angels) on high when they were disputing and discussing (about the creation of Adam).
70. "Only this has been inspired to me, that I am a plain warner."
71. (Remember) when your Lord said to the angels: "Truly, I am going to create man from clay".
72. So when I have fashioned him and breathed into him (his) soul created by Me, then you fall down prostrate to him."
73. So the angels prostrated themselves, all of them:
74. Except Iblees (Satan) he was proud and was one of the disbelievers.
75. (Allah) said: "O Iblees (Satan)! What prevents you from prostrating yourself to one whom I have created with Both My Hands. Are you too proud (to fall prostrate to Adam) or are you one of the high exalted?"
76. (Iblees (Satan)) said: "I am better than he, You created me from fire, and You created him from clay."
77. (Allah) said: "Then get out from here, for verily, you are outcast.
78. "And verily!, My Curse is on you till the Day of Recompense."
79. (Iblees (Satan)) said: "My Lord! Give me then respite till the Day the (dead) are resurrected."
80. (Allah) said: "Verily! You are of those allowed respite
81. "Till the Day of the time appointed."
82. (Iblees (Satan)) said: "By Your Might, then I will surely mislead them all,
83. "Except Your chosen slaves amongst them (faithful, obedient, true believers of Islamic Monotheism)."
84. (Allah) said: "The Truth is, and the Truth I say,
85. That I will fill Hell with you (Iblees (Satan)) and those of them (mankind) that follow you, together."
86. Say (O Muhammad SAW): "No wage do I ask of you for this (the Quran), nor am I one of the Mutakallifoon (those who pretend and fabricate things which do not exist).
87. "It (this Quran) is only a Reminder for all the Alameen (mankind and jinns).
88. "And you shall certainly know the truth of it after a while.