1. Ha-Meem. (These letters are one of the miracles of the Quran, and none but Allah (Alone) knows their meanings).
2. The revelation of the Book (this Quran) is from Allah the All-Mighty, the All-Knower.
3. The Forgiver of sin, the Acceptor of repentance, the Severe in punishment, the Bestower (of favours),La ilaha illa Huwa (none has the right to be worshipped but He), to Him is the final return.
4. None disputes in the Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.) of Allah but those who disbelieve. So let not their ability of going about here and there through the land (for their purposes) deceive you (O Muhammad SAW, their ultimate end will be the Fire of Hell)!
5. The people of Nooh (Noah) and the confederates after them denied (their Messengers) before these,and every (disbelieving) nation plotted against their Messenger to seize him, and disputed by means of falsehood to refute therewith the truth. So I seized them (with punishment), and how (terrible) was My punishment!
6. Thus has the Word of your Lord been justified against those who disbelieved, that they will be the dwellers of the Fire.
7. Those (angels) who bear the Throne (of Allah) and those around it glorify the praises of their Lord,and believe in Him, and ask forgiveness for those who believe (in the Oneness of Allah) (saying): "Our Lord! You comprehend all things in mercy and knowledge, so forgive those who repent and follow Your Way, and save them from the torment of the blazing Fire!
8. "Our Lord! And make them enter the Adn (Eden) Paradise (everlasting Gardens) which you have promised them, and to the righteous among their fathers, their wives, and their offspring! Verily, You are the All-Mighty, the All-Wise.
9. "And save them from (the punishment, because of what they did of) the sins, and whomsoever You save from (the punishment, because of what they did of) the sins (i.e. excuse them) that Day, him verily,You have taken into mercy." And that is the supreme success.
10. Those who disbelieve will be addressed (at the time of entering into the Fire): "Allahs aversion was greater towards you (in the worldly life when you used to reject the Faith) than your aversion towards one another (now in the Fire of Hell, as you are now enemies to one another), when you were called to the Faith but you used to refuse."
11. They will say: "Our Lord! You have made us to die twice (i.e. we were dead in the loins of our fathers and dead after our deaths in this world), and You have given us life twice (i.e. life when we were born and life when we are Resurrected)! Now we confess our sins, then is there any way to get out (of the Fire)?"
12. (It will be said): "This is because, when Allah Alone was invoked (in worship, etc.) you disbelieved,but when partners were joined to Him, you believed! So the judgement is only with Allah, the Most High, the Most Great!"
13. It is He, Who shows you His Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.) and sends down (rain with which grows) provision for you from the sky. And none remembers but those who turn (to Allah) in obedience and in repentance (by begging His Pardon and by worshipping and obeying Him Alone and none else).
14. So, call you (O Muhammad SAW and the believers) upon (or invoke) Allah making (your) worship pure for Him (Alone) (by worshipping none but Him and by doing religious deeds sincerely for Allahs sake only and not to show-off and not to set up rivals with Him in worship). However much the disbelievers (in the Oneness of Allah) may hate (it).
15. (He is Allah) Owner of High Ranks and Degrees, the Owner of the Throne. He sends the Inspiration by His Command to any of His slaves He wills, that he (the person who receives inspiration) may warn (men) of the Day of Mutual Meeting (i.e. The Day of Resurrection).
16. The Day when they will (all) come out, nothing of them will be hidden from Allah. Whose is the kingdom this Day? (Allah Himself will reply to His Question): It is Allahs the One, the Irresistible!
17. This Day shall every person be recompensed for what he earned. No injustice (shall be done to anybody). Truly, Allah is Swift in reckoning.
18. And warn them (O Muhammad SAW) of the Day that is drawing near (i.e. the Day of Resurrection),when the hearts will be choking the throats, and they can neither return them (hearts) to their chests nor can they throw them out. There will be no friend, nor an intercessor for the Zalimoon (polytheists and wrong-doers, etc.), who could be given heed to.
19. Allah knows the fraud of the eyes, and all that the breasts conceal.
20. And Allah judges with truth, while those to whom they invoke besides Him, cannot judge anything.Certainly, Allah! He is the All-Hearer, the All-Seer.
21. Have they not travelled in the land and seen what was the end of those who were before them? They were superior to them in strength, and in the traces (which they left) in the land. But Allah seized them with punishment for their sins. And none had they to protect them from Allah.
22. That was because there came to them their Messengers with clear evidences, proofs and signs but they disbelieved (in them). So Allah seized them with punishment. Verily, He is All-Strong, Severe in punishment.
23. And indeed We sent Moosa (Moses) with Our Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs,revelations, etc.), and a manifest authority,
24. To Firaun (Pharaoh), Haman and Qaroon (Korah), but they called (him): "A sorcerer, a liar!"
25. Then, when he brought them the Truth from Us, they said: "Kill the sons of those who believe with him and let their women live", but the plots of disbelievers are nothing but errors!
26. Firaun (Pharaoh) said: "Leave me to kill Moosa (Moses), and let him call his Lord (to stop me from killing him)! I fear that he may change your religion, or that he may cause mischief to appear in the land!"
27. Moosa (Moses) said: "Verily, I seek refuge in my Lord and your Lord from every arrogant who believes not in the Day of Reckoning!"
28. And a believing man of Firauns (Pharaoh) family, who hid his faith said: "Would you kill a man because he says: My Lord is Allah, and he has come to you with clear signs (proofs) from your Lord?And if he is a liar, upon him will be (the sin of) his lie; but if he is telling the truth, then some of that (calamity) wherewith he threatens you will befall on you." Verily, Allah guides not one who is a Musrif (a polytheist, or a murderer who shed blood without a right, or those who commit great sins, oppressor,transgressor), a liar!
29. "O my people! Yours is the kingdom this day, you are uppermost in the land. But who will save us from the Torment of Allah, should it befall us?" Firaun (Pharaoh) said: "I show you only that which I see (correct), and I guide you only to the path of right policy!"
30. And he who believed said: "O my people! Verily, I fear for you a fate like that day (of disaster) of the Confederates (of old)!
31. "Like the fate of the people of Nooh (Noah), and Ad, and Thamood and those who came after them.And Allah wills no injustice for (His) slaves.
32. "And, O my people! Verily! I fear for you the Day when there will be mutual calling (between the people of Hell and of Paradise)."
33. A Day when you will turn your backs and flee having no protector from Allah, And whomsoever Allah sends astray, for him there is no guide.
34. And indeed Yoosuf (Joseph) did come to you, in times gone by, with clear signs, but you ceased not to doubt in that which he did bring to you, till when he died you said: "No Messenger will Allah send after him." Thus Allah leaves astray him who is a Musrif (a polytheist, oppressor, a criminal, sinner who commit great sins) and a Murtab (one who doubts Allahs Warning and His Oneness).
35. Those who dispute about the Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.) of Allah, without any authority that has come to them, it is greatly hateful and disgusting to Allah and to those who believe. Thus does Allah seal up the heart of every arrogant, tyrant. (So they cannot guide themselves to the Right Path).
36. And Firaun (Pharaoh) said: "O Haman! Build me a tower that I may arrive at the ways,
37. "The ways of the heavens, and I may look upon the Ilah (God) of Moosa (Moses) but verily, I think him to be a liar." Thus it was made fair-seeming, in Firauns (Pharaoh) eyes, the evil of his deeds, and he was hindered from the (Right) Path, and the plot of Firaun (Pharaoh) led to nothing but loss and destruction (for him).
38. And the man who believed said: "O my people! Follow me, I will guide you to the way of right conduct (i.e. guide you to Allahs religion of Islamic Monotheism with which Moosa (Moses) has been sent).
39. "O my people! Truly, this life of the world is nothing but a (quick passing) enjoyment, and verily,the Hereafter that is the home that will remain forever."
40. "Whosoever does an evil deed, will not be requited except the like thereof, and whosoever does a righteous deed, whether male or female and is a true believer (in the Oneness of Allah), such will enter Paradise, where they will be provided therein (with all things in abundance) without limit.
41. "And O my people! How is it that I call you to salvation while you call me to the Fire!
42. "You invite me to disbelieve in Allah (and in His Oneness), and to join partners in worship with Him; of which I have no knowledge, and I invite you to the All-Mighty, the Oft-Forgiving!
43. "No doubt you call me to (worship) one who cannot grant (me) my request (or respond to my invocation) in this world or in the Hereafter. And our return will be to Allah, and Al-Musrifoon (i.e.polytheists and arrogants, those who commit great sins, the transgressors of Allahs set limits)! They shall be the dwellers of the Fire!
44. "And you will remember what I am telling you, and my affair I leave it to Allah. Verily, Allah is the All-Seer of (His) slaves."
45. So Allah saved him from the evils that they plotted (against him), while an evil torment encompassed Firauns (Pharaoh) people.
46. The Fire; they are exposed to it, morning and afternoon, and on the Day when the Hour will be established (it will be said to the angels): "Cause Firauns (Pharaoh) people to enter the severest torment!"
47. And, when they will dispute in the Fire, the weak will say to those who were arrogant; "Verily! We followed you, can you then take from us some portion of the Fire?"
48. Those who were arrogant will say: "We are all (together) in this (Fire)! Verily Allah has judged between (His) slaves!"
49. And those in the Fire will say to the keepers (angels) of Hell: "Call upon your Lord to lighten for us the torment for a day!"
50. They will say: "Did there not come to you, your Messengers with (clear) evidences and signs? They will say: "Yes." They will reply: "Then call (as you like)! And the invocation of the disbelievers is nothing but in error!"
51. Verily, We will indeed make victorious Our Messengers and those who believe (in the Oneness of Allah Islamic Monotheism) in this worlds life and on the Day when the witnesses will stand forth, (i.e.Day of Resurrection),
52. The Day when their excuses will be of no profit to Zalimoon (polytheists, wrong-doers and disbelievers in the Oneness of Allah). Theirs will be the curse, and theirs will be the evil abode (i.e.painful torment in Hell-fire).
53. And, indeed We gave Moosa (Moses) the guidance, and We caused the Children of Israel to inherit the Scripture (i.e. the Taurat (Torah)),
54. A guide and a reminder for men of understanding.
55. So be patient (O Muhammad SAW). Verily, the Promise of Allah is true, and ask forgiveness for your fault, and glorify the praises of your Lord in the Ashi (i.e. the time period after the midnoon till sunset) and in the Ibkar (i.e. the time period from early morning or sunrise till before midnoon) (it is said that, that means the five compulsory congregational Salat (prayers) or the Asr and Fajr prayers).
56. Verily, those who dispute about the Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.)of Allah, without any authority having come to them, there is nothing else in their breasts except pride (to accept you (Muhammad SAW) as a Messenger of Allah and to obey you). They will never have it (i.e. Prophethood which Allah has bestowed upon you). So seek refuge in Allah (O Muhammad SAW from the arrogants). Verily, it is He Who is the All-Hearer, the All-Seer.
57. The creation of the heavens and the earth is indeed greater than the creation of mankind, yet most of mankind know not.
58. And not equal are the blind and those who see, nor are (equal) those who believe (in the Oneness of Allah Islamic Monotheism), and do righteous good deeds, and those who do evil. Little do you remember!
59. Verily, the Hour (Day of Judgement) is surely coming, therein is no doubt, yet most men believe not.
60. And your Lord said: "Invoke Me, (i.e. believe in My Oneness (Islamic Monotheism)) (and ask Me for anything) I will respond to your (invocation). Verily! Those who scorn My worship (i.e. do not invoke Me, and do not believe in My Oneness, (Islamic Monotheism)) they will surely enter Hell in humiliation!"
61. Allah, it is He Who has made the night for you that you may rest therein and the day for you to see.Truly, Allah is full of Bounty to mankind, yet most of mankind give no thanks.
62. That is Allah, your Lord, the Creator of all things, La ilaha illa Huwa (none has the right to be worshipped but He), where then you are turning away (from Allah, by worshipping others instead of Him)!
63. Thus were turned away those who used to deny the Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs,revelations, etc.) of Allah.
64. Allah, it is He Who has made for you the earth as a dwelling place and the sky as a canopy, and has given you shape and made your shapes good (looking) and has provided you with good things. That is Allah, your Lord, then blessed be Allah, the Lord of the Alameen (mankind, jinns and all that exists).
65. He is the Ever Living, La ilaha illa Huwa (none has the right to be worshipped but He), so invoke Him making your worship pure for Him Alone (by worshipping Him Alone, and none else, and by doing righteous deeds sincerely for Allahs sake only, and not to show off, and not to set up rivals with Him in worship). All the praises and thanks be to Allah, the Lord of the Alameen (mankind, jinns and all that exists).
66. Say (O Muhammad SAW): "I have been forbidden to worship those whom you worship besides Allah, since there have come to me evidences from my Lord, and I am commanded to submit (in Islam)to the Lord of the Alameen (mankind, jinns and all that exists).
67. He, it is Who has created you (Adam) from dust, then from a Nutfah (mixed semen drops of male and female discharge (i.e. Adams offspring)) then from a clot (a piece of coagulated blood), then brings you forth as children, then (makes you grow) to reach the age of full strength, and afterwards to be old (men and women), though some among you die before, and that you reach an appointed term, in order that you may understand.
68. He it is Who gives life and causes death. And when He decides upon a thing He says to it only:"Be!" and it is.
69. See you not those who dispute about the Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations,etc.) of Allah? How are they turning away (from the truth, i.e. Islamic Monotheism to the falsehood of polytheism)?
70. Those who deny the Book (this Quran), and that with which We sent Our Messengers (i.e. to worship none but Allah Alone sincerely, and to reject all false deities and to confess resurrection after the death for recompense) they will come to know (when they will be cast into the Fire of Hell).
71. When iron collars will be rounded over their necks, and the chains, they shall be dragged along.
72. In the boiling water, then they will be burned in the Fire.
73. Then it will be said to them: "Where are (all) those whom you used to join in worship as partners
74. "Besides Allah" They will say: "They have vanished from us: Nay, we did not invoke (worship)anything before." Thus Allah leads astray the disbelievers.
75. That was because you had been exulting in the earth without any right (by worshipping others instead of Allah and by committing crimes), and that you used to rejoice extremely (in your error).
76. Enter the gates of Hell to abide therein, and (indeed) what an evil abode of the arrogant!
77. So be patient (O Muhammad SAW), verily, the Promise of Allah is true, and whether We show you (O Muhammad SAW in this world) some part of what We have promised them, or We cause you to die,then it is to Us they all shall be returned.
78. And, indeed We have sent Messengers before you (O Muhammad SAW); of some of them We have related to you their story and of some We have not related to you their story, and it was not given to any Messenger that he should bring a sign except by the Leave of Allah. So, when comes the Commandment of Allah, the matter will be decided with truth, and the followers of falsehood will then be lost.
79. Allah, it is He Who has made cattle for you, that you may ride on some of them and of some you eat.
80. And you have (many other) benefits from them, and that you may reach by their means a desire that is in your breasts (i.e. carry your goods, loads, etc.), and on them and on ships you are carried.
81. And He shows you His Signs and Proofs (of His Oneness in all the above mentioned things). Which,then of the Signs and Proofs of Allah do you deny?
82. Have they not travelled through the earth and seen what was the end of those before them? They were more numerous than them and mightier in strength, and in the traces (they have left behind them)in the land, yet all that they used to earn availed them not.
83. Then when their Messengers came to them with clear proofs, they were glad (and proud) with that which they had of the knowledge (of worldly things): And that at which they used to mock, surrounded them (i.e. the punishment).
84. So when they saw Our punishment, they said: "We believe in Allah Alone and reject (all) that we used to associate with Him as (His) partners.
85. Then their Faith (in Islamic Monotheism) could not avail them when they saw Our punishment.(Like) this has been the way of Allah in dealing with His slaves. And there the disbelievers lost utterly (when Our Torment covered them)