1. HaMeem. (These letters are one of the miracles of the Quran, and none but Allah (Alone) knows their meanings).
2. By the manifest Book (that makes things clear, i.e. this Quran).
3. We verily, have made it a Quran in Arabic, that you may be able to understand (its meanings and its admonitions).
4. And Verily, it (this Quran) is in the Mother of the Book (i.e. Al-Lauh Al-Mahfooz), before Us, indeed Exalted, full of Wisdom.
5. Shall We then (warn you not and) take away the Reminder (this Quran) from you, because you are a people Musrifoon.
6. And how many a Prophet have We sent amongst the men of old.
7. And never came there a Prophet to them but they used to mock at him.
8. Then We destroyed men stronger (in power) than these, and the example of the ancients has passed away (before them).
9. And indeed if you ask them, "Who has created the heavens and the earth?" They will surely say: "The All-Mighty, the All-Knower created them."
10. Who has made for you the earth like a bed, and has made for you roads therein, in order that you may find your way,
11. And Who sends down water (rain) from the sky in due measure. Then We revive a dead land therewith, and even so you will be brought forth (from the dead),
12. And Who has created all the pairs and has appointed for you ships and cattle on which you ride,
13. In order that you may mount firmly on their backs, and then may remember the Favour of your Lord when you mount thereon, and say: "Glory to Him who has subjected this to us, and we could never have it (by our efforts)."
14. And verily, to Our Lord we indeed are to return!
15. Yet they assign to some of His slaves a share with Him (by pretending that He has children, and considering them as equals or co-partners in worship with Him). Verily, man is indeed a manifest ingrate!
16. Or has He taken daughters out of what He has created, and He has selected for you sons?
17. And if one of them is informed of the news of (the birth of) that which he set forth as a parable to the Most Beneficent (Allah) (i.e. of a girl), his face becomes dark, gloomy, and he is filled with grief!
18. (Do they then like for Allah) a creature who is brought up in adornments (wearing silk and gold ornaments, i.e. women), and in dispute cannot make herself clear?
19. And they make the angels who themselves are slaves to the Most Beneficent (Allah) females. Did they witness their creation? Their evidence will be recorded, and they will be questioned!
20. And they said: "If it had been the Will of the Most Beneficent (Allah), we should not have worshipped them (false deities)." They have no knowledge whatsoever of that. They do nothing but lie!
21. Or have We given them any Book before this (the Quran), to which they are holding fast?
22. Nay! They say: "We found our fathers following a certain way and religion, and we guide ourselves by their footsteps."
23. And similarly, We sent not a warner before you (O Muhammad SAW) to any town (people) but the luxurious ones among them said: "We found our fathers following a certain way and religion, and we will indeed follow their footsteps."
24. (The warner) said: "Even if I bring you better guidance than that which you found your fathers following?" They said: "Verily, We disbelieve in that with which you have been sent."
25. So We took revenge of them, then see what was the end of those who denied (Islamic Monotheism).
26. And (remember) when Ibraheem (Abraham) said to his father and his people: "Verily, I am innocent of what you worship,
27. "Except Him (i.e. I worship none but Allah Alone) Who did create me, and verily, He will guide me."
28. And he made it (i.e. La ilaha ill-Allah (none has the right to be worshipped but Allah Alone)) a Word lasting among his offspring (True Monotheism), that they may turn back (i.e. to repent to Allah or receive admonition).
29. Nay, but I gave (the good things of this life) to these (polytheists) and their fathers to enjoy, till there came to them the truth (the Quran), and a Messenger (Muhammad SAW) making things clear.
30. And when the truth (this Quran) came to them, they (the disbelievers in this Quran) said: "This is magic, and we disbelieve therein."
31. And they say: "Why is not this Quran sent down to some great man of the two towns (Makkah and Taif)?"
32. Is it they who would portion out the Mercy of your Lord? It is We Who portion out between them their livelihood in this world, and We raised some of them above others in ranks, so that some may employ others in their work. But the Mercy (Paradise) of your Lord (O Muhammad SAW) is better than the (wealth of this world) which they amass.
33. And were it not that all mankind would have become of one community (all disbelievers, desiring worldly life only), We would have provided for those who disbelieve in the Most Beneficent (Allah),silver roofs for their houses, and elevators (and stair-ways, etc. of silver) whereby they ascend,
34. And for their houses, doors (of silver), and thrones (of silver) on which they could recline,
35. And adornments of gold. Yet all this (i.e. the roofs, doors, stairs, elevators, thrones etc. of their houses) would have been nothing but an enjoyment of this world. And the Hereafter with your Lord is only for the Muttaqoon.
36. And whosoever turns away (blinds himself) from the remembrance of the Most Beneficent (Allah)(i.e. this Quran and worship of Allah), We appoint for him Shaitan (Satan devil) to be a Qareen (an intimate companion) to him.
37. And verily, they (Satans / devils) hinder them from the Path (of Allah), but they think that they are guided aright!
38. Till, when (such a one) comes to Us, he says (to his Qareen (Satan / devil companion)) "Would that between me and you were the distance of the two easts (or the east and west)" a worst (type of)companion (indeed)!
39. It will profit you not this Day (O you who turn away from Allahs remembrance and His worship,etc.) as you did wrong, (and) that you will be sharers (you and your Qareen) in the punishment.
40. Can you (O Muhammad SAW) make the deaf to hear, or can you guide the blind or him who is in manifest error?
41. And even if We take you (O Muhammad SAW) away, We shall indeed take vengeance on them.
42. Or (if) We show you that wherewith We threaten them, then verily, We have perfect command over them.
43. So hold you (O Muhammad SAW) fast to that which is inspired in you. Verily, you are on a Straight Path.
44. And verily, this (the Quran) is indeed a Reminder for you (O Muhammad SAW) and your people (Quraish people, or your followers), and you will be questioned (about it).
45. And ask (O Muhammad SAW) those of Our Messengers whom We sent before you: "Did We ever appoint aliha (gods) to be worshipped besides the Most Beneficent (Allah)?"
46. And indeed We did send Moosa (Moses) with Our Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs,revelations, etc.) to Firaun (Pharaoh) and his chiefs (inviting them to Allahs Religion of Islam) He said:"Verily, I am a Messenger of the Lord of the Alameen (mankind, jinns and all that exists)."
47. But when he came to them with Our Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.)behold! They laughed at them.
48. And not an Ayah (sign, etc.) We showed them but it was greater than its fellow, and We seized them with torment, in order that they might turn (from their polytheism to Allahs Religion (Islamic Monotheism)).
49. And they said (to Moosa (Moses)): "O you sorcerer! Invoke your Lord for us according to what He has covenanted with you. Verily, We shall guide ourselves (aright)."
50. But when We removed the torment from them, behold! They broke their covenant (that they will believe if We remove the torment for them).
51. And Firaun (Pharaoh) proclaimed among his people, saying: "O my people! Is not mine the dominion of Egypt, and these rivers flowing underneath me. See you not then?
52. "Am I not better than this one (Moosa (Moses)), who is Maheen (has no honour nor any respect, and is weak and despicable) and can scarcely express himself clearly?
53. "Why then are not golden bracelets bestowed on him, or angels sent along with him?"
54. Thus he (Firaun (Pharaoh)) befooled and misled his people, and they obeyed him. Verily, they were ever a people who were Fasiqoon (rebellious, disobedient to Allah).
55. So when they angered Us, We punished them, and drowned them all.
56. And We made them a precedent (as a lesson for those coming after them), and an example to later generations.
57. And when the son of Maryam (Mary) is quoted as an example (i.e. Iesa (Jesus) is worshipped like their idols), behold! Your people cry aloud (laugh out at the example).
58. And say: "Are our aliha (gods) better or is he (Iesa (Jesus))?" They quoted not the above example except for argument. Nay! But they are a quarrelsome people. ((See VV. 21:97-101) - The Quran.)
59. He (Iesa (Jesus)) was not more than a slave. We granted Our Favour to him, and We made him an example to the Children of Israel (i.e. his creation without a father).
60. And if it were Our Will, We would have (destroyed you (mankind) all, and) made angels to replace you on the earth. (Tafsir At-Tabaree, Vol:25, Page 89).
61. And he (Iesa (Jesus), son of Maryam (Mary)) shall be a known sign for (the coming of) the Hour (Day of Resurrection) (i.e. Iesas (Jesus) descent on the earth) . Therefore have no doubt concerning it (i.e. the Day of Resurrection). And follow Me (Allah) (i.e. be obedient to Allah and do what He orders you to do, O mankind)! This is the Straight Path (of Islamic Monotheism, leading to Allah and to His Paradise).
62. And let not Shaitan (Satan) hinder you (from the right religion, i.e. Islamic Monotheism), Verily, he (Satan) to you is a plain enemy.
63. And when Iesa (Jesus) came with (Our) clear Proofs, he said: "I have come to you with Al-Hikmah (Prophethood), and in order to make clear to you some of the (points) in which you differ, therefore fear Allah and obey me,
64. "Verily, Allah! He is my Lord (God) and your Lord (God). So worship Him (Alone). This is the (only) Straight Path (i.e. Allahs religion of true Islamic Monotheism)."
65. But the sects from among themselves differed. So woe to those who do wrong (by ascribing things to Iesa (Jesus) that are not true) from the torment of a painful Day (i.e. the Day of Resurrection)!
66. Do they only wait for the Hour that it shall come upon them suddenly, while they perceive not?
67. Friends on that Day will be foes one to another except Al-Muttaqoon (pious - see V.2:2).
68. (It will be said to the true believers of Islamic Monotheism): My worshippers! No fear shall be on you this Day, nor shall you grieve,
69. (You) who believed in Our Ayat (proofs, verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.) and were Muslims (i.e. who submit totally to Allahs Will, and believe in the Oneness of Allah - Islamic Monotheism).
70. Enter Paradise, you and your wives, in happiness.
71. Trays of gold and cups will be passed round them, (there will be) therein all that the ones innerselves could desire, all that the eyes could delight in, and you will abide therein forever.
72. This is the Paradise which you have been made to inherit because of your deeds which you used to do (in the life of the world).
73. Therein for you will be fruits in plenty, of which you will eat (as you desire).
74. Verily, the Mujrimoon (criminals, sinners, disbelievers, etc.) will be in the torment of Hell to abide therein forever.
75. (The torment) will not be lightened for them, and they will be plunged into destruction with deep regrets, sorrows and in despair therein.
76. We wronged them not, but they were the Zalimoon (polytheists, wrong-doers, etc.).
77. And they will cry: "O Malik (Keeper of Hell)! Let your Lord make an end of us." He will say:"Verily you shall abide forever."
78. Indeed We have brought the truth (Muhammad SAW with the Quran), to you, but most of you have a hatred for the truth.
79. Or have they plotted some plan? Then We too are planning.
80. Or do they think that We hear not their secrets and their private counsel? (Yes We do) and Our Messengers (appointed angels in charge of mankind) are by them, to record.
81. Say (O Muhammad SAW): "If the Most Beneficent (Allah) had a son (or children as you pretend),then I am the first of Allahs worshippers (who deny and refute this claim of yours (and the first to believe in Allah Alone and testify that He has no children))." (Tafsir At-Tabaree).
82. Glorified be the Lord of the heavens and the earth, the Lord of the Throne! Exalted be He from all that they ascribe (to Him).
83. So leave them (alone) to speak nonsense and play until they meet the Day of theirs, which they have been promised.
84. It is He (Allah) Who is the only Ilah (God to be worshipped) in the heaven and the only Ilah (God to be worshipped) on the earth. And He is the All-Wise, the All-Knower.
85. And blessed be He to Whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and all that is between them, and with Whom is the knowledge of the Hour, and to Whom you (all) will be returned.
86. And those whom they invoke instead of Him have no power of intercession; except those who bear witness to the truth (i.e. believed in the Oneness of Allah, and obeyed His Orders), and they know (the facts about the Oneness of Allah) .
87. And if you ask them who created them, they will surely say: "Allah". How then are they turned away (from the worship of Allah, Who created them)?
88. (Allah has knowledge) of (Prophet Muhammads) saying: "O my Lord! Verily, these are a people who believe not!"
89. So turn away from them (O Muhammad SAW), and say: Salam (peace)! But they will come to know