1. Ha-Meem. (These letters are one of the miracles of the Quran and none but Allah (Alone) knows their meanings).
2. By the manifest Book (this Quran) that makes things clear,
3. We sent it (this Quran) down on a blessed night ((i.e. night of Qadr, Soorah No: 97) in the month of Ramadan,, the 9th month of the Islamic calendar). Verily, We are ever warning (mankind that Our Torment will reach those who disbelieve in Our Oneness of Lordship and in Our Oneness of worship).
4. Therein (that night) is decreed every matter of ordainments .
5. Amran (i.e. a Command or this Quran or the Decree of every matter) from Us. Verily, We are ever sending (the Messengers),
6. (As) a Mercy from your Lord. Verily! He is the All-Hearer, the All-Knower.
7. The Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, if you (but) have a faith with certainty.
8. La ilaha illa Huwa (none has the right to be worshipped but He). It is He Who gives life and causes death, your Lord and the Lord of your fore-fathers.
9. Nay! They play in doubt.
10. Then wait you for the Day when the sky will bring forth a visible smoke.
11. Covering the people, this is a painful torment.
12. (They will say): "Our Lord! Remove the torment from us, really we shall become believers!"
13. How can there be for them an admonition (at the time when the torment has reached them), when a Messenger explaining things clearly has already come to them.
14. Then they had turned away from him (Messenger Muhammad SAW) and said: "One (Muhammad SAW) taught (by a human being), a madman!"
15. Verily, We shall remove the torment for a while. Verily! You will revert.
16. On the Day when We shall seize you with the greatest grasp. Verily, We will exact retribution.
17. And indeed We tried before them Firauns (Pharaoh) people, when there came to them a noble Messenger (i.e. Moosa (Moses) ),
18. Saying: "Restore to me the slaves of Allah (i.e. the Children of Israel). Verily! I am to you a Messenger worthy of all trust,
19. "And exalt not (yourselves) against Allah. Truly, I have come to you with a manifest authority.
20. "And truly, I seek refuge in my Lord and your Lord, lest you stone me (or call me a sorcerer or kill me).
21. "But if you believe me not, then keep away from me and leave me alone."
22. (But they were aggressive), so he (Moosa (Moses)) called upon his Lord (saying): "These are indeed the people who are Mujrimoon (disbelievers, polytheists, sinners, criminals, etc.)."
23. (Allah said): "Depart you with My slaves by night. Surely, you will be pursued.
24. "And leave the sea as it is (quiet and divided). Verily, They are a host to be drowned."
25. How many of gardens and springs do they (Firauns (Pharaoh) people) left.
26. And green crops (fields etc.) and goodly places,
27. And comforts of life wherein they used to take delight!
28. Thus (it was)! And We made other people inherit them (i.e. We made the Children of Israel to inherit the kingdom of Egypt).
29. And the heavens and the earth wept not for them, nor were they given a respite.
30. And indeed We saved the Children of Israel from the humiliating torment,
31. From Firaun (Pharaoh); Verily! He was arrogant and was of the Musrifoon (those who transgress beyond bound in spending and other things and commit great sins).
32. And We chose them (the Children of Israel) above the Alameen (mankind, and jinns) (during the time of Moosa (Moses)) with knowledge,
33. And granted them signs in which there was a plain trial.
34. Verily, these (Quraish) people are saying:
35. "There is nothing but our first death, and we shall not be resurrected.
36. "Then bring back our fore-fathers, if you speak the truth!"
37. Are they better or the people of Tubba and those before them? We destroyed them because they were indeed Mujrimoon (disbelievers, polytheists, sinners, criminals, etc.).
38. And We created not the heavens and the earth, and all that is between them, for mere play,
39. We created them not except with truth (i.e. to examine and test those who are obedient and those who are disobedient and then reward the obedient ones and punish the disobedient ones), but most of them know not.
40. Verily, the Day of Judgement (when Allah will judge between the creatures) is the time appointed for all of them,
41. The Day when Maulan (a near relative) cannot avail Maulan (a near relative) in aught, and no help can they receive,
42. Except him on whom Allah has Mercy. Verily, He is the All-Mighty, the Most Merciful.
43. Verily, the tree of Zaqqoom,
44. Will be the food of the sinners,
45. Like boiling oil, it will boil in the bellies,
46. Like the boiling of scalding water.
47. (It will be said) "Seize him and drag him into the midst of blazing Fire,
48. "Then pour over his head the torment of boiling water,
49. "Taste you (this)! Verily, you were (pretending to be) the mighty, the generous!
50. "Verily! This is that whereof you used to doubt!"
51. Verily! The Muttaqoon (pious - see V.2:2), will be in place of Security (Paradise).
52. Among Gardens and Springs;
53. Dressed in fine silk and (also) in thick silk, facing each other,
54. So (it will be), and We shall marry them to Houris (female fair ones) with wide, lovely eyes.
55. They will call therein for every kind of fruit in peace and security;
56. They will never taste death therein except the first death (of this world), and He will save them from the torment of the blazing Fire,
57. As a Bounty from your Lord! That will be the supreme success!
58. Certainly, We have made this (Quran) easy in your tongue, in order that they may remember.
59. Wait then (O Muhammad SAW); Verily, they (too) are waiting