1. Qaf. (These letters (Qaf, etc.) are one of the miracles of the Quran, and none but Allah (Alone) knows their meanings). By the Glorious Quran.
2. Nay, they wonder that there has come to them a warner (Muhammad SAW) from among themselves.So the disbelievers say: "This is a strange thing!
3. "When we are dead and have become dust (shall we be resurrected?) That is a far return."
4. We know that which the earth takes of them (their dead bodies), and with Us is a Book preserved (i.e.the Book of Decrees).
5. Nay, but they have denied the truth (this Quran) when it has come to them, so they are in a confused state (can not differentiate between right and wrong).
6. Have they not looked at the heaven above them, how We have made it and adorned it, and there are no rifts in it?
7. And the earth! We have spread it out, and set thereon mountains standing firm, and have produced therein every kind of lovely growth (plants).
8. An insight and a Reminder for every slave turning to Allah (i.e. the one who believes in Allah and performs deeds of His obedience, and always begs His pardon).
9. And We send down blessed water (rain) from the sky, then We produce therewith gardens and grain (every kind of harvests) that are reaped.
10. And tall date-palms, with ranged clusters;
11. A provision for (Allahs) slaves. And We give life therewith to a dead land. Thus will be the resurrection (of the dead).
12. Denied before them (i.e. these pagans of Makkah who denied you, O Muhammad SAW) the people of Nooh (Noah), and the dwellers of Rass, and the Thamood,
13. And Ad, and Firaun (Pharaoh), and the brethren of Lout (Lot),
14. And the dwellers of the Wood, and the people of Tubba; everyone of them denied (their)Messengers, so My Threat took effect.
15. Were We then tired with the first creation? Nay, They are in confused doubt about a new creation (i.e. Resurrection)?
16. And indeed We have created man, and We know what his ownself whispers to him. And We are nearer to him than his jugular vein (by Our Knowledge).
17. (Remember!) that the two receivers (recording angels) receive (each human being after he or she has attained the age of puberty), one sitting on the right and one on the left (to note his or her actions) .
18. Not a word does he (or she) utter, but there is a watcher by him ready (to record it).
19. And the stupor of death will come in truth: "This is what you have been avoiding!"
20. And the Trumpet will be blown, that will be the Day whereof warning (had been given) (i.e. the Day of Resurrection).
21. And every person will come forth along with an (angel) to drive (him), and an (angel) to bear witness.
22. (It will be said to the sinners): "Indeed you were heedless of this, now We have removed your covering, and sharp is your sight this Day!"
23. And his companion (angel) will say: "Here is (this Record) ready with me!"
24. (And it will be said): "Both of you throw (Order from Allah to the two angels) into Hell, every stubborn disbeliever (in the Oneness of Allah, in His Messengers, etc.).
25. "Hinderer of good, transgressor, doubter,
26. "Who set up another ilah (god) with Allah, then (both of you) cast him in the severe torment."
27. His companion (Satan devil)) will say: "Our Lord! I did not push him to transgress, (in disbelief,oppression, and evil deeds) but he was himself in error far astray."
28. Allah will say: "Dispute not in front of Me, I had already, in advance, sent you the threat.
29. The Sentence that comes from Me cannot be changed, and I am not unjust (to the least) to the slaves."
30. On the Day when We will say to Hell: "Are you filled?" It will say: "Are there any more (to come)?"
31. And Paradise will be brought near to the Muttaqoon (pious - see V.2:2) not far off.
32. (It will be said): "This is what you were promised, - (it is) for those oft-returning (to Allah) in sincere repentance, and those who preserve their covenant with Allah (by obeying Him in all what He has ordered, and worship none but Allah Alone, i.e. follow Allahs Religion, Islamic Monotheism).
33. "Who feared the Most Beneficent (Allah) in the Ghaib (unseen): (i.e. in this worldly life before seeing and meeting Him), and brought a heart turned in repentance (to Him - and absolutely free from each and every kind of polytheism),
34. "Enter you therein in peace and security; this is a Day of eternal life!"
35. There they will have all that they desire, and We have more (for them, i.e. a glance at the AllMighty, All-Majestic Ìá ÌáÇáå ).
36. And how many a generation We have destroyed before them, who were stronger in power than them,and (when Our Torment came) they ran for a refuge in the land! Could they find any place of refuge (for them to save themselves from destruction)?
37. Verily, therein is indeed a reminder for him who has a heart or gives ear while he is heedful.
38. And indeed We created the heavens and the earth and all between them in six Days and nothing of fatigue touched Us.
39. So bear with patience (O Muhammad SAW) all that they say, and glorify the Praises of your Lord,before the rising of the sun and before (its) setting (i.e. the Fajr, Zuhr, and Asr prayers) .
40. And during a part of the night (also), glorify His praises (i.e. Maghrib and Isha prayers), and (so likewise) after the prayers (As-Sunnah, Nawafil optional and additional prayers, and also glorify, praise and magnify Allah - Subhan Allah, Alhamdu lillah, Allahu-Akbar).
41. And listen on the Day when the caller will call from a near place,
42. The Day when they will hear As-Saihah (shout, etc.) in truth, that will be the Day of coming out (from the graves i.e. the Day of Resurrection).
43. Verily, We it is Who give life and cause death; and to Us is the final return,
44. On the Day when the earth shall be cleft, from off them, (they will come out) hastening forth. That will be a gathering, quite easy for Us.
45. We know of best what they say; and you (O Muhammad SAW) are not a tyrant over them (to force them to Belief). But warn by the Quran, him who fears My Threat