1. When the Event (i.e. the Day of Resurrection) befalls.
2. And there can be no denying of its befalling.
3. It will bring low (some); (and others) it will exalt;
4. When the earth will be shaken with a terrible shake.
5. And the mountains will be powdered to dust.
6. So that they will become floating dust particles.
7. And you (all) will be in three kinds (i.e. separate groups).
8. So those on the Right Hand (i.e. those who will be given their Records in their right hands), Who will be those on the Right Hand? (As a respect for them, because they will enter Paradise).
9. And those on the Left Hand (i.e. those who will be given their Record in their left hands), Who will be those on the Left Hand? (As a disgrace for them, because they will enter Hell).
10. And those foremost ((in Islamic Faith of Monotheism and in performing righteous deeds) in the life of this world on the very first call for to embrace Islam,) will be foremost (in Paradise).
11. These will be those nearest to Allah.
12. In the Gardens of delight (Paradise).
13. A multitude of those (foremost) will be from the first generations (who embraced Islam).
14. And a few of those (foremost) will be from the later time (generations).
15. (They will be) on thrones woven with gold and precious stones,
16. Reclining thereon, face to face.
17. They will be served by immortal boys,
18. With cups, and jugs, and a glass from the flowing wine,
19. Wherefrom they will get neither any aching of the head, nor any intoxication.
20. And fruit; that they may choose.
21. And the flesh of fowls that they desire.
22. And (there will be) Houris (fair females) with wide, lovely eyes (as wives for the pious),
23. Like unto preserved pearls.
24. A reward for what they used to do.
25. No Laghw (dirty, false, evil vain talk) will they hear therein, nor any sinful speech (like backbiting,etc.).
26. But only the saying of: Salam!, Salam! (greetings with peace) !
27. And those on the Right Hand, Who will be those on the Right Hand?
28. (They will be) among thornless lote-trees,
29. Among Talh (banana-trees) with fruits piled one above another,
30. In shade long-extended,
31. By water flowing constantly,
32. And fruit in plenty,
33. Whose season is not limited, and their supply will not be cut off,
34. And on couches or thrones, raised high.
35. Verily, We have created them (maidens) of special creation.
36. And made them virgins.
37. Loving (their husbands only), equal in age.
38. For those on the Right Hand.
39. A multitude of those (on the Right Hand) will be from the first generation (who embraced Islam).
40. And a multitude of those (on the Right Hand) will be from the later times (generations).
41. And those on the Left Hand Who will be those on the Left Hand?
42. In fierce hot wind and boiling water,
43. And shadow of black smoke,
44. (That shadow) neither cool, nor (even) good,
45. Verily, before that, they indulged in luxury,
46. And were persisting in great sin (joining partners in worship along with Allah, committing murders and other crimes, etc.)
47. And they used to say: "When we die and become dust and bones, shall we then indeed be resurrected?
48. "And also our forefathers?"
49. Say (O Muhammad SAW): "(Yes) verily, those of old, and those of later times.
50. "All will surely be gathered together for appointed Meeting of a known Day.
51. "Then moreover, verily, you the erring-ones, the deniers (of Resurrection)!
52. "You verily will eat of the trees of Zaqqoom.
53. "Then you will fill your bellies therewith,
54. "And drink boiling water on top of it,
55. "So you will drink (that) like thirsty camels!"
56. That will be their entertainment on the Day of Recompense!
57. We created you, then why do you believe not?
58. Then tell Me (about) the human semen that you emit.
59. Is it you who create it (i.e. make this semen into a perfect human being), or are We the Creator?
60. We have decreed death to you all, and We are not unable,
61. To transfigure you and create you in (forms) that you know not.
62. And indeed, you have already known the first form of creation (i.e. the creation of Adam), why then do you not remember or take heed?
63. Tell Me! The seed that you sow in the ground.
64. Is it you that make it grow, or are We the Grower?
65. Were it Our Will, We could crumble it to dry pieces, and you would be regretful (or left in wonderment).
66. (Saying): "We are indeed Mughramoon (i.e. ruined or lost the money without any profit, or punished by the loss of all that we spend for cultivation, etc.)! (See Tafsir Al-Qurtubee, Vol. 17, Page 219)
67. "Nay, but we are deprived!"
68. Tell Me! The water that you drink.
69. Is it you who cause it from the rainclouds to come down, or are We the Causer of it to come down?
70. If We willed, We verily could make it salt (and undrinkable), why then do you not give thanks (to Allah)?
71. Tell Me! The fire which you kindle,
72. Is it you who made the tree thereof to grow, or are We the Grower?
73. We have made it a Reminder (for the Hell-fire, in the Hereafter); and an article of use for the travellers (and all the others, in this world).
74. Then glorify with praises the Name of your Lord, the Most Great.
75. So I swear by Mawaqi (setting or the mansions, etc.) of the stars (they traverse).
76. And verily, that is indeed a great oath, if you but know.
77. That (this) is indeed an honourable recital (the Noble Quran).
78. In a Book well-guarded (with Allah in the heaven i.e. Al-Lauh Al-Mahfooz).
79. Which (that Book with Allah) none can touch but the purified (i.e. the angels).
80. A Revelation (this Quran) from the Lord of the Alameen (mankind, jinns and all that exists).
81. Is it such a talk (this Quran) that you (disbelievers) deny?
82. And instead (of thanking Allah) for the provision He gives you, on the contrary, you deny Him (by disbelief)!
83. Then why do you not (intervene) when (the soul of a dying person) reaches the throat?
84. And you at the moment are looking on,
85. But We (i.e. Our angels who take the soul) are nearer to him than you, but you see not, (Tafsir AtTabaree, Vol.27, Page 209)
86. Then why do you not, if you are exempt from the reckoning and recompense (punishment, etc.)
87. Bring back the soul (to its body), if you are truthful?
88. Then, if he (the dying person) be of the Muqarraboon (those brought near to Allah),
89. (There is for him) rest and provision, and a Garden of delights (Paradise).
90. And if he (the dying person) be of those on the Right Hand,
91. Then there is safety and peace (from the Punishment of Allah) for (you as you are from) those on the Right Hand.
92. But if he (the dying person) be of the denying (of the Resurrection), the erring (away from the Right Path of Islamic Monotheism),
93. Then for him is entertainment with boiling water.
94. And burning in Hell-fire.
95. Verily, this! This is an absolute Truth with certainty.
96. So glorify with praises the Name of your Lord, the Most Great