1. Noon. (These letters (Noon, etc.) are one of the miracles of the Quran, and none but Allah (Alone)knows their meanings).By the pen and what the (angels) write (in the Records of men).
2. You (O Muhammad SAW) are not, by the Grace of your Lord, a madman.
3. And verily, for you (O Muhammad SAW) will be an endless reward.
4. And verily, you (O Muhammad SAW) are on an exalted standard of character.
5. You will see, and they will see,
6. Which of you is afflicted with madness.
7. Verily, your Lord knows better, who (among men) has gone astray from His Path, and He knows better those who are guided.
8. So (O Muhammad SAW) obey not the deniers ((of Islamic Monotheism those who belie the Verses of Allah), the Oneness of Allah, and the Messenger of Allah (Muhammad SAW), etc.)
9. They wish that you should compromise (in religion out of courtesy) with them, so they (too) would compromise with you.
10. And obey not everyone who swears much, and is considered worthless,
11. A slanderer, going about with calumnies,
12. Hinderer of the good, transgressor, sinful,
13. Cruel, after all that base-born (of illegitimate birth),
14. (He was so) because he had wealth and children.
15. When Our Verses (of the Quran) are recited to him, he says: "Tales of the men of old!"
16. We shall brand him over the nose!
17. Verily, We have tried them as We tried the people of the garden, when they swore to pluck the fruits of the (garden) in the morning,
18. Without saying: Insha Allah (If Allah will).
19. Then there passed by on the (garden) something (fire) from your Lord at night and burnt it while they were asleep.
20. So the (garden) became black by the morning, like a pitch dark night (in complete ruins).
21. Then they called out one to another as soon as the morning broke,
22. Saying: "Go to your tilth in the morning, if you would pluck the fruits."
23. So they departed, conversing in secret low tones (saying),
24. No Miskeen (poor man) shall enter upon you into it today.
25. And they went in the morning with strong intention, thinking that they have power (to prevent the poor taking anything of the fruits therefrom).
26. But when they saw the (garden), they said: "Verily, we have gone astray,"
27. (Then they said): "Nay! Indeed we are deprived of (the fruits)!"
28. The best among them said: "Did I not tell you: why do you not say: Insha Allah (If Allah will)."
29. They said: "Glory to Our Lord! Verily, we have been Zalimoon (wrong-doers, etc.)."
30. Then they turned, one against another, in blaming.
31. They said: "Woe to us! Verily, we were Taghoon (transgressors and disobedient, etc.)
32. We hope that our Lord will give us in exchange a better (garden) than this. Truly, we turn to our Lord (wishing for good that He may forgive our sins, and reward us in the Hereafter)."
33. Such is the punishment (in this life), but truly, the punishment of the Hereafter is greater, if they but knew.
34. Verily, for the Muttaqoon (pious and righteous persons - see V.2:2) are Gardens of delight (Paradise)with their Lord.
35. Shall We then treat the (submitting) Muslims like the Mujrimoon (criminals, polytheists and disbelievers, etc.)?
36. What is the matter with you? How judge you?
37. Or have you a Book through which you learn.
38. That you shall have all that you choose?
39. Or you have oaths from Us, reaching to the Day of Resurrection that yours will be what you judge.
40. Ask them, which of them will stand surety for that!
41. Or have they "partners"? Then let them bring their "partners" if they are truthful!
42. (Remember) the Day when the Shin shall be laid bare (i.e. the Day of Resurrection) and they shall be called to prostrate (to Allah), but they (hypocrites) shall not be able to do so,
43. Their eyes will be cast down, ignominy will cover them; they used to be called to prostrate (offer prayers), while they were healthy and good (in the life of the world, but they did not).
44. Then leave Me Alone with such as belie this Quran. We shall punish them gradually from directions they perceive not.
45. And I will grant them a respite. Verily, My Plan is strong.
46. Or is it that you (O Muhammad SAW) ask them a wage, so that they are heavily burdened with debt?
47. Or that the Ghaib (unseen here in this Verse it means Al-Lauh Al-Mahfooz) is in their hands, so that they can write it down?
48. So wait with patience for the Decision of your Lord, and be not like the Companion of the Fish,when he cried out (to Us) while he was in deep sorrow. (See the Quran, Verse 21:87).
49. Had not a Grace from his Lord reached him, he would indeed have been (left in the stomach of the fish, but We forgave him), so he was cast off on the naked shore, while he was to be blamed.
50. But his Lord chose him and made him of the righteous.
51. And verily, those who disbelieve would almost make you slip with their eyes through hatredness when they hear the Reminder (the Quran), and they say: "Verily, he (Muhammad SAW) is a madman!"
52. But it is nothing else than a Reminder to all the Alameen (mankind, jinns and all that exists)