1. Alif Lam Meem Sad.
2. (This is the) Book (the Quran) sent down unto you (O Muhammad SAW), so let not your breast be narrow therefrom, that you warn thereby, and a reminder unto the believers.
3. (Say (O Muhammad SAW) to these idolaters (pagan Arabs) of your folk:) Follow what has been sent down unto you from your Lord (the Quran and Prophet Muhammads Sunnah), and follow not any Auliya (protectors and helpers, etc. who order you to associate partners in worship with Allah), besides Him (Allah). Little do you remember!
4. And a great number of towns (their population) We destroyed (for their crimes). Our torment came upon them (suddenly) by night or while they were sleeping for their afternoon rest.
5. No cry did they utter when Our Torment came upon them but this: "Verily, we were Zalimoon (polytheists and wrongdoers, etc.)".
6. Then surely, We shall question those (people) to whom it (the Book) was sent and verily, We shall question the Messengers.
7. Then surely, We shall narrate unto them (their whole story) with knowledge, and indeed We were not absent.
8. And the weighing on that day (Day of Resurrection) will be the true (weighing). So as for those whose scale (of good deeds) will be heavy, they will be the successful (by entering Paradise).
9. And as for those whose scale will be light, they are those who will lose their ownselves (by entering Hell) because they denied and rejected Our Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations,etc.).
10. And surely, We gave you authority on the earth and appointed for you therein provisions (for your life). Little thanks do you give.
11. And surely, We created you (your father Adam) and then gave you shape (the noble shape of a human being), then We told the angels, "Prostrate to Adam", and they prostrated, except Iblees (Satan),he refused to be of those who prostrate.
12. (Allah) said: "What prevented you (O Iblees) that you did not prostrate, when I commanded you?"Iblees said: "I am better than him (Adam), You created me from fire, and him You created from clay."
13. (Allah) said: "(O Iblees) get down from this (Paradise), it is not for you to be arrogant here. Get out,for you are of those humiliated and disgraced."
14. (Iblees) said: "Allow me respite till the Day they are raised up (i.e. the Day of Resurrection)."
15. (Allah) said: "You are of those allowed respite."
16. (Iblees) said: "Because You have sent me astray, surely I will sit in wait against them (human beings) on Your Straight Path.
17. Then I will come to them from before them and behind them, from their right and from their left, and You will not find most of them as thankful ones (i.e. they will not be dutiful to You)."
18. (Allah) said (to Iblees) "Get out from this (Paradise) disgraced and expelled. Whoever of them (mankind) will follow you, then surely I will fill Hell with you all."
19. "And O Adam! Dwell you and your wife in Paradise, and eat thereof as you both wish, but approach not this tree otherwise you both will be of the Zalimoon (unjust and wrongdoers)."
20. Then Shaitan (Satan) whispered suggestions to them both in order to uncover that which was hidden from them of their private parts (before); he said: "Your Lord did not forbid you this tree save you should become angels or become of the immortals."
21. And he (Shaitan (Satan)) swore by Allah to them both (saying): "Verily, I am one of the sincere wellwishers for you both."
22. So he misled them with deception. Then when they tasted of the tree, that which was hidden from them of their shame (private parts) became manifest to them and they began to stick together the leaves of Paradise over themselves (in order to cover their shame). And their Lord called out to them (saying):"Did I not forbid you that tree and tell you: Verily, Shaitan (Satan) is an open enemy unto you?"
23. They said: "Our Lord! We have wronged ourselves. If You forgive us not, and bestow not upon us Your Mercy, we shall certainly be of the losers."
24. (Allah) said: "Get down, one of you an enemy to the other (i.e. Adam, Hawwa (Eve), and Shaitan (Satan), etc.). On earth will be a dwellingplace for you and an enjoyment, - for a time."
25. He said: "Therein you shall live, and therein you shall die, and from it you shall be brought out (i.e.resurrected)."
26. O Children of Adam! We have bestowed raiment upon you to cover yourselves (screen your private parts, etc.) and as an adornment, and the raiment of righteousness, that is better. Such are among the Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.) of Allah, that they may remember (i.e.leave falsehood and follow truth).
27. O Children of Adam! Let not Shaitan (Satan) deceive you, as he got your parents (Adam and Hawwa (Eve)) out of Paradise, stripping them of their raiments, to show them their private parts. Verily, he and Qabeeluhu (his soldiers from the jinns or his tribe) see you from where you cannot see them. Verily, We made the Shayatin (devils) Auliya (protectors and helpers) for those who believe not.
28. And when they commit a Fahisha (evil deed, going round the Kabah in naked state, every kind of unlawful sexual intercourse, etc.), they say: "We found our fathers doing it, and Allah has commanded us of it." Say: "Nay, Allah never commands of Fahisha. Do you say of Allah what you know not?
29. Say (O Muhammad SAW): My Lord has commanded justice and (said) that you should face Him only (i.e. worship none but Allah and face the Qiblah, i.e. the Kabah at Makkah during prayers) in each and every place of worship, in prayers (and not to face other false deities and idols), and invoke Him only making your religion sincere to Him by not joining in worship any partner to Him and with the intention that you are doing your deeds for Allahs sake only. As He brought you (into being) in the beginning, so shall you be brought into being (on the Day of Resurrection) (in two groups, one as a blessed one (believers), and the other as a wretched one (disbelievers)).
30. A group He has guided, and a group deserved to be in error; (because) surely they took the Shayatin (devils) as Auliya (protectors and helpers) instead of Allah, and consider that they are guided.
31. O Children of Adam! Take your adornment (by wearing your clean clothes), while praying and going round (the Tawaf of ) the Kabah, and eat and drink but waste not by extravagance, certainly He (Allah) likes not Al-Musrifoon (those who waste by extravagance).
32. Say (O Muhammad SAW): "Who has forbidden the adoration with clothes given by Allah, which He has produced for his slaves, and At-Taiyibat (all kinds of Halal (lawful) things) of food?" Say: "They are, in the life of this world, for those who believe, (and) exclusively for them (believers) on the Day of Resurrection (the disbelievers will not share them)." Thus We explain the Ayat (Islamic laws) in detail for people who have knowledge.
33. Say (O Muhammad SAW): "(But) the things that my Lord has indeed forbidden are AlFawahish (great evil sins, every kind of unlawful sexual intercourse, etc.) whether committed openly or secretly,sins (of all kinds), unrighteous oppression, joining partners (in worship) with Allah for which He has given no authority, and saying things about Allah of which you have no knowledge."
34. And every nation has its appointed term; when their term is reached, neither can they delay it nor can they advance it an hour (or a moment).
35. O Children of Adam! If there come to you Messengers from amongst you, reciting to you, My Verses, then whosoever becomes pious and righteous, on them shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve.
36. But those who reject Our Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.) and treat them with arrogance, they are the dwellers of the (Hell) Fire, they will abide therein forever.
37. Who is more unjust than one who invents a lie against Allah or rejects His Ayat (proofs, evidences,verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.)? For such their appointed portion (good things of this worldly life and their period of stay therein) will reach them from the Book (of Decrees) until, when Our Messengers (the angel of death and his assistants) come to them to take their souls, they (the angels) will say: "Where are those whom you used to invoke and worship besides Allah," they will reply, "They have vanished and deserted us." And they will bear witness against themselves, that they were disbelievers.
38. (Allah) will say: "Enter you in the company of nations who passed away before you, of men and jinns, into the Fire." Every time a new nation enters, it curses its sister nation (that went before), until they will be gathered all together in the Fire. The last of them will say to the first of them: "Our Lord!These misled us, so give them a double torment of the Fire." He will say: "For each one there is double (torment), but you know not."
39. The first of them will say to the last of them: "You were not better than us, so taste the torment for what you used to earn."
40. Verily, those who belie Our Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.) and treat them with arrogance, for them the gates of heaven will not be opened, and they will not enter Paradise until the camel goes through the eye of the needle (which is impossible). Thus do We recompense the Mujrimoon (criminals, polytheists, sinners, etc.).
41. Theirs will be a bed of Hell (Fire), and over them coverings (of Hell-fire). Thus do We recompense the Zalimoon (polytheists and wrongdoers, etc.).
42. But those who believed (in the Oneness of Allah - Islamic Monotheism), and worked righteousness We tax not any person beyond his scope, such are the dwellers of Paradise. They will abide therein.
43. And We shall remove from their breasts any (mutual) hatred or sense of injury (which they had, if at all, in the life of this world); rivers flowing under them, and they will say: "All the praises and thanks be to Allah, Who has guided us to this, never could we have found guidance, were it not that Allah had guided us! Indeed, the Messengers of our Lord did come with the truth." And it will be cried out to them: "This is the Paradise which you have inherited for what you used to do."
44. And the dwellers of Paradise will call out to the dwellers of the Fire (saying): "We have indeed found true what our Lord had promised us; have you also found true, what your Lord promised (warnings, etc.)?" They shall say: "Yes." Then a crier will proclaim between them: "The Curse of Allah is on the Zalimoon (polytheists and wrongdoers, etc.),"
45. Those who hindered (men) from the Path of Allah, and would seek to make it crooked, and they were disbelievers in the Hereafter.
46. And between them will be a barrier screen and on AlAraf (a wall with elevated places) will be men (whose good and evil deeds would be equal in scale), who would recognise all (of the Paradise and Hell people), by their marks (the dwellers of Paradise by their white faces and the dwellers of Hell by their black faces), they will call out to the dwellers of Paradise, "Salamun Alaikoom" (peace be on you), and at that time they (men on Al-Araf) will not yet have entered it (Paradise), but they will hope to enter (it)with certainty.
47. And when their eyes will be turned towards the dwellers of the Fire, they will say: "Our Lord! Place us not with the people who are Zalimoon (polytheists and wrongdoers)."
48. And the men on AlAraf (the wall) will call unto the men whom they would recognise by their marks,saying: "Of what benefit to you were your great numbers (and hoards of wealth), and your arrogance against Faith?"
49. Are they those, of whom you swore that Allah would never show them mercy. (Behold! It has been said to them): "Enter Paradise, no fear shall be on you, nor shall you grieve."
50. And the dwellers of the Fire will call to the dwellers of Paradise: "Pour on us some water or anything that Allah has provided you with." They will say: "Both (water and provision) Allah has forbidden to the disbelievers."
51. "Who took their religion as an amusement and play, and the life of the world deceived them." So this Day We shall forget them as they forgot their meeting of this Day, and as they used to reject Our Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.).
52. Certainly, We have brought to them a Book (the Quran) which We have explained in detail with knowledge, - a guidance and a mercy to a people who believe.
53. Await they just for the final fulfillment of the event? On the Day the event is finally fulfilled (i.e. the Day of Resurrection), those who neglected it before will say: "Verily, the Messengers of our Lord did come with the truth, now are there any intercessors for us that they might intercede on our behalf? Or could we be sent back (to the first life of the world) so that we might do (good) deeds other than those (evil) deeds which we used to do?" Verily, they have lost their ownselves (i.e. destroyed themselves)and that which they used to fabricate (invoking and worshipping others besides Allah) has gone away from them.
54. Indeed your Lord is Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth in Six Days, and then He Istawa (rose over) the Throne (really in a manner that suits His Majesty). He brings the night as a cover over the day, seeking it rapidly, and (He created) the sun, the moon, the stars subjected to His Command.Surely, His is the Creation and Commandment. Blessed be Allah, the Lord of the Alameen (mankind,jinns and all that exists)!
55. Invoke your Lord with humility and in secret. He likes not the aggressors.
56. And do not do mischief on the earth, after it has been set in order, and invoke Him with fear and hope; Surely, Allahs Mercy is (ever) near unto the gooddoers.
57. And it is He Who sends the winds as heralds of glad tidings, going before His Mercy (rain). Till when they have carried a heavyladen cloud, We drive it to a land that is dead, then We cause water (rain) to descend thereon. Then We produce every kind of fruit therewith. Similarly, We shall raise up the dead, so that you may remember or take heed.
58. The vegetation of a good land comes forth (easily) by the Permission of its Lord, and that which is bad, brings forth nothing but a little with difficulty. Thus do We explain variously the Ayat (proofs,evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.) for a people who give thanks.
59. Indeed, We sent Nooh (Noah) to his people and he said: "O my people! Worship Allah! You have no other Ilah (God) but Him. (La ilaha ill-Allah: none has the right to be worshipped but Allah). Certainly, I fear for you the torment of a Great Day!"
60. The leaders of his people said: "Verily, we see you in plain error."
61. (Nooh (Noah)) said: "O my people! There is no error in me, but I am a Messenger from the Lord of the Alameen (mankind, jinns and all that exists)!
62. "I convey unto you the Messages of my Lord and give sincere advice to you. And I know from Allah what you know not.
63. "Do you wonder that there has come to you a Reminder from your Lord through a man from amongst you, that he may warn you, so that you may fear Allah and that you may receive (His) Mercy?"
64. But they belied him, so We saved him and those along with him in the ship, and We drowned those who belied Our Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.). They were indeed a blind people.
65. And to Ad (people, We sent) their brother Hood. He said: "O my people! Worship Allah! You have no other Ilah (God) but Him. (La ilaha ill-Allah: none has the right to be worshipped but Allah). Will you not fear (Allah)?"
66. The leaders of those who disbelieved among his people said: "Verily, we see you in foolishness, and verily, we think you are one of the liars."
67. (Hood) said: "O my people! There is no foolishness in me, but (I am) a Messenger from the Lord of the Alameen (mankind, jinns and all that exists)!
68. "I convey unto you the Messages of my Lord, and I am a trustworthy adviser (or wellwisher) for you.
69. "Do you wonder that there has come to you a Reminder (and an advice) from your Lord through a man from amongst you that he may warn you? And remember that He made you successors after the people of Nooh (Noah), and increased you amply in stature. So remember the graces (bestowed upon you) from Allah, so that you may be successful."
70. They said: "You have come to us that we should worship Allah Alone and forsake that which our fathers used to worship. So bring us that wherewith you have threatened us if you are of the truthful."
71. (Hood) said: "Torment and wrath have already fallen on you from your Lord. Dispute you with me over names which you have named - you and your fathers, with no authority from Allah? Then wait, I am with you among those who wait."
72. So We saved him and those who were with him by a Mercy from Us, and We cut the roots of those who belied Our Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.), and they were not believers.
73. And to Thamood (people, We sent) their brother Salih (Saleh). He said: "O my people! Worship Allah! You have no other Ilah (God) but Him. (La ilaha ill-Allah: none has the right to be worshipped but Allah). Indeed there has come to you a clear sign (the miracle of the coming out of a huge shecamel from the midst of a rock) from your Lord. This shecamel of Allah is a sign unto you; so you leave her to graze in Allahs earth, and touch her not with harm, lest a painful torment should seize you.
74. "And remember when He made you successors after Ad (people) and gave you habitations in the land, you build for yourselves palaces in plains, and carve out homes in the mountains. So remember the graces (bestowed upon you) from Allah, and do not go about making mischief on the earth."
75. The leaders of those who were arrogant among his people said to those who were counted weak - to such of them as believed: "Know you that Salih (Saleh) is one sent from his Lord." They said: "We indeed believe in that with which he has been sent."
76. Those who were arrogant said: "Verily, we disbelieve in that which you believe in."
77. So they killed the shecamel and insolently defied the Commandment of their Lord, and said: "O Salih (Saleh)! Bring about your threats if you are indeed one of the Messengers (of Allah)."
78. So the earthquake seized them, and they lay (dead), prostrate in their homes.
79. Then he (Salih (Saleh)) turned from them, and said: "O my people! I have indeed conveyed to you the Message of my Lord, and have given you good advice but you like not good advisers."
80. And (remember) Lout (Lot), when he said to his people: "Do you commit the worst sin such as none preceding you has committed in the Alameen (mankind and jinns)?
81. "Verily, you practise your lusts on men instead of women. Nay, but you are a people transgressing beyond bounds (by committing great sins)."
82. And the answer of his people was only that they said: "Drive them out of your town, these are indeed men who want to be pure (from sins)!"
83. Then We saved him and his family, except his wife; she was of those who remained behind (in the torment).
84. And We rained down on them a rain (of stones). Then see what was the end of the Mujrimoon (criminals, polytheists, sinners, etc.).
85. And to (the people of) Madyan (Midian), (We sent) their brother Shuaib. He said: "O my people!Worship Allah! You have no other Ilah (God) but Him. (La ilaha ill-Allah (none has the right to be worshipped but Allah))." Verily, a clear proof (sign) from your Lord has come unto you; so give full measure and full weight and wrong not men in their things, and do not mischief on the earth after it has been set in order, that will be better for you, if you are believers.
86. "And sit not on every road, threatening, and hindering from the Path of Allah those who believe in Him. and seeking to make it crooked. And remember when you were but few, and He multiplied you.And see what was the end of the Mufsidoon (mischief-makers, corrupts, liars).
87. "And if there is a party of you who believes in that with which I have been sent and a party who do not believe, so be patient until Allah judges between us, and He is the Best of judges."
88. The chiefs of those who were arrogant among his people said: "We shall certainly drive you out, O Shuaib, and those who have believed with you from our town, or else you (all) shall return to our religion." He said: "Even though we hate it!
89. "We should have invented a lie against Allah if we returned to your religion, after Allah has rescued us from it. And it is not for us to return to it unless Allah, our Lord, should will. Our Lord comprehends all things in His Knowledge. In Allah (Alone) we put our trust. Our Lord! Judge between us and our people in truth, for You are the Best of those who give judgment."
90. The chiefs of those who disbelieved among his people said (to their people): "If you follow Shuaib,be sure then you will be the losers!"
91. So the earthquake seized them and they lay (dead), prostrate in their homes.
92. Those who belied Shuaib, became as if they had never dwelt there (in their homes). Those who belied Shuaib, they were the losers.
93. Then he (Shuaib) turned from them and said: "O my people! I have indeed conveyed my Lords Messages unto you and I have given you good advice. Then how can I sorrow for the disbelieving peoples (destruction)."
94. And We sent no Prophet unto any town (and they denied him), but We seized its people with suffering from extreme poverty (or loss in wealth) and loss of health and calamities, so that they might humiliate themselves (and repent to Allah).
95. Then We changed the evil for the good, until they increased in number and in wealth, and said: "Our fathers were touched with evil (loss of health and calamities) and with good (prosperity, etc.)." So We seized them of a sudden while they were unaware.
96. And if the people of the towns had believed and had the Taqwa (piety), certainly, We should have opened for them blessings from the heaven and the earth, but they belied (the Messengers). So We took them (with punishment) for what they used to earn (polytheism and crimes, etc.).
97. Did the people of the towns then feel secure against the coming of Our Punishment by night while they are asleep?
98. Or, did the people of the towns then feel secure against the coming of Our Punishment in the forenoon while they play?
99. Did they then feel secure against the Plan of Allah. None feels secure from the Plan of Allah except the people who are the losers.
100. Is it not clear to those who inherit the earth in succession from its (previous) possessors, that had We willed, We would have punished them for their sins. And We seal up their hearts so that they hear not?
101. Those were the towns whose story We relate unto you (O Muhammad SAW). And there came indeed to them their Messengers with clear proofs, but they were not such as to believe in that which they had rejected before. Thus Allah does seal up the hearts of the disbelievers (from each and every kind of religious guidance).
102. And most of them We found not (true) to their covenant, but most of them We found indeed Fasiqoon (rebellious, disobedient to Allah).
103. Then after them We sent Moosa (Moses) with Our Signs to Firaun (Pharaoh) and his chiefs, but they wrongfully rejected them. So see how was the end of the Mufsidoon (mischief-makers, corrupts,etc.).
104. And Moosa (Moses) said: "O Firaun (Pharaoh)! I am a Messenger from the Lord of the Alameen (mankind, jinns and all that exists).
105. "Proper it is for me that I say nothing concerning Allah but the truth. Indeed I have come unto you from your Lord with a clear proof. So let the Children of Israel depart along with me."
106. (Firaun (Pharaoh)) said: "If you have come with a sign, show it forth, - if you are one of those who tell the truth."
107. Then (Moosa (Moses)) threw his stick and behold! it was a serpent, manifest!
108. And he drew out his hand, and behold! it was white (with radiance) for the beholders.
109. The chiefs of the people of Firaun (Pharaoh) said: "This is indeed a well-versed sorcerer;
110. "He wants to get you out of your land, so what do you advise?"
111. They said: "Put him and his brother off (for a time), and send callers (men) to the cities to collect (and) 112. "That they bring up to you all well-versed sorcerers."
113. And so the sorcerers came to Firaun (Pharaoh). They said: "Indeed there will be a (good) reward for us if we are the victors."
114. He said: "Yes, and moreover you will (in that case) be of the nearest (to me)."
115. They said: "O Moosa (Moses)! Either you throw (first), or shall we have the (first) throw?"
116. He (Moosa (Moses)) said: "Throw you (first)." So when they threw, they bewitched the eyes of the people, and struck terror into them, and they displayed a great magic.
117. And We inspired Moosa (Moses) (saying): "Throw your stick," and behold! It swallowed up straight away all the falsehoods which they showed.
118. Thus truth was confirmed, and all that they did was made of no effect.
119. So they were defeated there and then, and were returned disgraced.
120. And the sorcerers fell down prostrate.
121. They said: "We believe in the Lord of the Alameen (mankind, jinns and all that exists).
122. "The Lord of Moosa (Moses) and Haroon (Aaron)."
123. Firaun (Pharaoh) said: "You have believed in him (Moosa (Moses)) before I give you permission.Surely, this is a plot which you have plotted in the city to drive out its people, but you shall come to know.
124. "Surely, I will cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides, then I will crucify you all."
125. They said: "Verily, we are returning to our Lord.
126. "And you take vengeance on us only because we believed in the Ayat (proofs, evidences, lessons,signs, etc.) of our Lord when they reached us! Our Lord! pour out on us patience, and cause us to die as Muslims."
127. The chiefs of Firauns (Pharaoh) people said: "Will you leave Moosa (Moses) and his people to spread mischief in the land, and to abandon you and your gods?" He said: "We will kill their sons, and let live their women, and we have indeed irresistible power over them."
128. Moosa (Moses) said to his people: "Seek help in Allah and be patient. Verily, the earth is Allahs.He gives it as a heritage to whom He will of His slaves, and the (blessed) end is for the Muttaqoon (pious - see V.2:2)."
129. They said: "We (Children of Israel) had suffered troubles before you came to us, and since you have come to us." He said: "It may be that your Lord will destroy your enemy and make you successors on the earth, so that He may see how you act?"
130. And indeed We punished the people of Firaun (Pharaoh) with years of drought and shortness of fruits (crops, etc.), that they might remember (take heed).
131. But whenever good came to them, they said: "Ours is this." And if evil afflicted them, they ascribed it to evil omens connected with Moosa (Moses) and those with him. Be informed! Verily, their evil omens are with Allah but most of them know not.
132. They said (to Moosa (Moses)): "Whatever Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs,revelations, etc.) you may bring to us, to work therewith your sorcery on us, we shall never believe in you."
133. So We sent on them: the flood, the locusts, the lice, the frogs, and the blood: (as a succession of)manifest signs, yet they remained arrogant, and they were of those people who were Mujrimoon (criminals, polytheists, sinners, etc.).
134. And when the punishment fell on them they said: "O Moosa (Moses)! Invoke your Lord for us because of His Promise to you. If you will remove the punishment from us, we indeed shall believe in you, and we shall let the Children of Israel go with you."
135. But when We removed the punishment from them to a fixed term, which they had to reach, behold!They broke their word!
136. So We took retribution from them. We drowned them in the sea, because they belied Our Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.) and were heedless about them.
137. And We made the people who were considered weak to inherit the eastern parts of the land and the western parts thereof which We have blessed. And the fair Word of your Lord was fulfilled for the Children of Israel, because of their endurance. And We destroyed completely all the great works and buildings which Firaun (Pharaoh) and his people erected.
138. And We brought the Children of Israel (with safety) across the sea, and they came upon a people devoted to some of their idols (in worship). They said: "O Moosa (Moses)! Make for us an ilahan (a god) as they have aliha (gods)." He said: "Verily, you are a people who know not (the Majesty and Greatness of Allah and what is obligatory upon you, i.e. to worship none but Allah Alone, the One and the Only God of all that exists)."
139. (Moosa (Moses) added:) "Verily, these people will be destroyed for that which they are engaged in (idols-worship). And all that they are doing is in vain."
140. He said: "Shall I seek for you an Ilahan (a God) other than Allah, while He has given you superiority over the Alameen (mankind and jinns of your time)."
141. And (remember) when We rescued you from Firauns (Pharaoh) people, who were afflicting you with the worst torment, killing your sons and letting your women live. And in that was a great trial from your Lord.
142. And We appointed for Moosa (Moses) thirty nights and added (to the period) ten (more), and he completed the term, appointed by his Lord, of forty nights. And Moosa (Moses) said to his brother Haroon (Aaron): "Replace me among my people, act in the Right Way (by ordering the people to obey Allah and to worship Him Alone) and follow not the way of the Mufsidoon (mischief-makers)."
143. And when Moosa (Moses) came at the time and place appointed by Us, and his Lord spoke to him,he said: "O my Lord! Show me (Yourself), that I may look upon You." Allah said: "You cannot see Me,but look upon the mountain if it stands still in its place then you shall see Me." So when his Lord appeared to the mountain, He made it collapse to dust, and Moosa (Moses) fell down unconscious. Then when he recovered his senses he said: "Glory be to You, I turn to You in repentance and I am the first of the believers."
144. (Allah) said: "O Moosa (Moses) I have chosen you above men by My Messages, and by My speaking (to you). So hold that which I have given you and be of the grateful."
145. And We wrote for him on the Tablets the lesson to be drawn from all things and the explanation of all things (and said): Hold unto these with firmness, and enjoin your people to take the better therein. I shall show you the home of Al-Fasiqoon (the rebellious, disobedient to Allah).
146. I shall turn away from My Ayat (verses of the Quran) those who behave arrogantly on the earth,without a right, and (even) if they see all the Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations,etc.), they will not believe in them. And if they see the way of righteousness (monotheism, piety, and good deeds), they will not adopt it as the Way, but if they see the way of error (polytheism, crimes and evil deeds), they will adopt that way, that is because they have rejected Our Ayat (proofs, evidences,verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.) and were heedless (to learn a lesson) from them.
147. Those who deny Our Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.) and the Meeting in the Hereafter (Day of Resurrection,), vain are their deeds. Do they expect to be rewarded with anything except what they used to do?
148. And the people of Moosa (Moses) made in his absence, out of their ornaments, the image of a calf (for worship). It had a sound (as if it was mooing). Did they not see that it could neither speak to them nor guide them to the way? They took it for worship and they were Zalimoon (wrong-doers).
149. And when they regretted and saw that they had gone astray, they (repented and) said: "If our Lord have not mercy upon us and forgive us, we shall certainly be of the losers."
150. And when Moosa (Moses) returned to his people, angry and grieved, he said: "What an evil thing is that which you have done (i.e. worshipping the calf) during my absence. Did you hasten and go ahead as regards the matter of your Lord (you left His worship)?" And he threw down the Tablets and seized his brother by (the hair of) his head and dragged him towards him. Haroon (Aaron) said: "O son of my mother! Indeed the people judged me weak and were about to kill me, so make not the enemies rejoice over me, nor put me amongst the people who are Zalimoon (wrong-doers)."
151. Moosa (Moses) said: "O my Lord! Forgive me and my brother, and make us enter into Your Mercy,for you are the Most Merciful of those who show mercy."
152. Certainly, those who took the calf (for worship), wrath from their Lord and humiliation will come upon them in the life of this world. Thus do We recompense those who invent lies.
153. But those who committed evil deeds and then repented afterwards and believed, verily, your Lord after (all) that is indeed Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.
154. And when the anger of Moosa (Moses) was appeased, he took up the Tablets, and in their inscription was guidance and mercy for those who fear their Lord.
155. And Moosa (Moses) chose out of his people seventy (of the best) men for Our appointed time and place of meeting, and when they were seized with a violent earthquake, he said: "O my Lord, if it had been Your Will, You could have destroyed them and me before; would You destroy us for the deeds of the foolish ones among us? It is only Your Trial by which You lead astray whom You will, and keep guided whom You will. You are our Walee (Protector), so forgive us and have Mercy on us, for You are the Best of those who forgive.
156. And ordain for us good in this world, and in the Hereafter. Certainly we have turned unto You." He said: (As to) My Punishment I afflict therewith whom I will and My Mercy embraces all things. That (Mercy) I shall ordain for those who are the Muttaqoon (pious - see V.2:2), and give Zakat; and those who believe in Our Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs and revelations, etc.);
157. Those who follow the Messenger, the Prophet who can neither read nor write (i.e.Muhammad SAW) whom they find written with them in the Taurat (Torah) (Deut, xviii, 15) and the Injeel (Gospel)(John xiv, 16), - he commands them for Al-Maroof (i.e. Islamic Monotheism and all that Islam has ordained); and forbids them from Al-Munkar (i.e. disbelief, polytheism of all kinds, and all that Islam has forbidden); he allows them as lawful At-Taiyibat ((i.e. all good and lawful) as regards things, deeds,beliefs, persons, foods, etc.), and prohibits them as unlawful Al-Khabaith (i.e. all evil and unlawful as regards things, deeds, beliefs, persons, foods, etc.), he releases them from their heavy burdens (of Allahs Covenant), and from the fetters (bindings) that were upon them. So those who believe in him (Muhammad SAW), honour him, help him, and follow the light (the Quran) which has been sent down with him, it is they who will be successful.
158. Say (O Muhammad SAW): "O mankind! Verily, I am sent to you all as the Messenger of Allah - to Whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth. La ilaha illa Huwa (none has the right to be worshipped but He); It is He Who gives life and causes death. So believe in Allah and His Messenger (Muhammad SAW), the Prophet who can neither read nor write (i.e. Muhammad SAW) who believes in Allah and His Words ((this Quran), the Taurat (Torah) and the Injeel (Gospel) and also Allahs Word:"Be!" - and he was, i.e. Iesa (Jesus) son of Maryam (Mary), Ç ), and follow him so that you may be guided."
159. And of the people of Moosa (Moses) there is a community who lead (the men) with truth and establish justice therewith (i.e. judge men with truth and justice).
160. And We divided them into twelve tribes (as distinct) nations. We directed Moosa (Moses) by inspiration, when his people asked him for water, (saying): "Strike the stone with your stick", and there gushed forth out of it twelve springs: each group knew its own place for water. We shaded them with the clouds and sent down upon them Al-Manna and the quails (saying): "Eat of the good things with which We have provided you." They harmed Us not but they used to harm themselves.
161. And (remember) when it was said to them: "Dwell in this town (Jerusalem) and eat therefrom wherever you wish, and say, (O Allah) forgive our sins; and enter the gate prostrate (bowing with humility). We shall forgive you your wrong-doings. We shall increase (the reward) for the good-doers."
162. But those among them who did wrong changed the word that had been told to them. So We sent on them a torment from heaven in return for their wrong-doings.
163. And ask them (O Muhammad SAW) about the town that was by the sea, when they transgressed in the matter of the Sabbath (i.e. Saturday): when their fish came to them openly on the Sabbath day, and did not come to them on the day they had no Sabbath. Thus We made a trial of them for they used to rebel (see the Quran: V.4:154).
164. And when a community among them said: "Why do you preach to a people whom Allah is about to destroy or to punish with a severe torment?" (The preachers) said: "In order to be free from guilt before your Lord (Allah), and perhaps they may fear Allah."
165. So when they forgot the remindings that had been given to them, We rescued those who forbade evil, but We seized those who did wrong with a severe torment because they used to rebel (disobey Allah).
166. So when they exceeded the limits of what they were prohibited, We said to them: "Be you monkeys, despised and rejected." (It is a severe warning to the mankind that they should not disobey what Allah commands them to do, and be far away from what He prohibits them).
167. And (remember) when your Lord declared that He would certainly keep on sending against them (i.e. the Jews), till the Day of Resurrection, those who would afflict them with a humiliating torment.Verily, your Lord is Quick in Retribution (for the disobedient, wicked) and certainly He is OftForgiving,Most Merciful (for the obedient and those who beg Allahs Forgiveness).
168. And We have broken them (i.e. the Jews) up into various separate groups on the earth, some of them are righteous and some are away from that. And We tried them with good (blessings) and evil (calamities) in order that they might turn (to Allahs Obedience).
169. Then after them succeeded an (evil) generation, which inherited the Book, but they chose (for themselves) the goods of this low life (evil pleasures of this world) saying (as an excuse): "(Everything)will be forgiven to us." And if (again) the offer of the like (evil pleasures of this world) came their way,they would (again) seize them (would commit those sins). Was not the covenant of the Book taken from them that they would not say about Allah anything but the truth? And they have studied what is in it (the Book). And the home of the Hereafter is better for those who are Al-Muttaqoon (the pious - see V.2:2).Do not you then understand?
170. And as to those who hold fast to the Book (i.e. act on its teachings) and perform As-Salat (Iqamatas-Salat), certainly, We shall never waste the reward of those who do righteous deeds.
171. And (remember) when We raised the mountain over them as if it had been a canopy, and they thought that it was going to fall on them. (We said): "Hold firmly to what We have given you (i.e. the Taurat (Torah)), and remember that which is therein (act on its commandments), so that you may fear Allah and obey Him."
172. And (remember) when your Lord brought forth from the Children of Adam, from their loins, their seed (or from Adams loin his offspring) and made them testify as to themselves (saying): "Am I not your Lord?" They said: "Yes! We testify," lest you should say on the Day of Resurrection: "Verily, we have been unaware of this."
173. Or lest you should say: "It was only our fathers afortime who took others as partners in worship along with Allah, and we were (merely their) descendants after them; will You then destroy us because of the deeds of men who practised Al-Batil (i.e. polytheism and committing crimes and sins, invoking and worshipping others besides Allah)?" (Tafsir At-Tabaree).
174. Thus do We explain the Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.) in detail,so that they may turn (unto the truth).
175. And recite (O Muhammad SAW) to them the story of him to whom We gave Our Ayat (proofs,evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.), but he threw them away, so Shaitan (Satan) followed him up, and he became of those who went astray.
176. And had We willed, We would surely have elevated him therewith but he clung to the earth and followed his own vain desire. So his description is the description of a dog: if you drive him away, he lolls his tongue out, or if you leave him alone, he (still) lolls his tongue out. Such is the description of the people who reject Our Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.). So relate the stories, perhaps they may reflect.
177. Evil is the likeness of the people who reject Our Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses and signs, etc.),and used to wrong their ownselves.
178. Whomsoever Allah guides, he is the guided one, and whomsoever He sends astray, those! They are the losers.
179. And surely, We have created many of the jinns and mankind for Hell. They have hearts wherewith they understand not, they have eyes wherewith they see not, and they have ears wherewith they hear not (the truth). They are like cattle, nay even more astray; those! They are the heedless ones.
180. And (all) the Most Beautiful Names belong to Allah, so call on Him by them, and leave the company of those who belie or deny (or utter impious speech against) His Names. They will be requited for what they used to do.
181. And of those whom We have created, there is a community who guides (others) with the truth, and establishes justice therewith.
182. Those who reject Our Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.), We shall gradually seize them with punishment in ways they perceive not.
183. And I respite them; certainly My Plan is strong.
184. Do they not reflect? There is no madness in their companion (Muhammad SAW). He is but a plain warner.
185. Do they not look in the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all things that Allah has created,and that it may be that the end of their lives is near. In what message after this will they then believe?
186. Whomsoever Allah sends astray, none can guide him; and He lets them wander blindly in their transgressions.
187. They ask you about the Hour (Day of Resurrection): "When will be its appointed time?" Say: "The knowledge thereof is with my Lord (Alone). None can reveal its time but He. Heavy is its burden through the heavens and the earth. It shall not come upon you except all of a sudden." They ask you as if you have a good knowledge of it. Say: "The knowledge thereof is with Allah (Alone) but most of mankind know not."
188. Say (O Muhammad SAW): "I possess no power of benefit or hurt to myself except as Allah wills.If I had the knowledge of the Ghaib (unseen), I should have secured for myself an abundance of wealth,and no evil should have touched me. I am but a warner, and a bringer of glad tidings unto people who believe."
189. It is He Who has created you from a single person (Adam), and (then) He has created from him his wife (Hawwa (Eve)), in order that he might enjoy the pleasure of living with her. When he had sexual relation with her, she became pregnant and she carried it about lightly. Then when it became heavy, they both invoked Allah, their Lord (saying): "If You give us a Salih (good in every aspect) child, we shall indeed be among the grateful."
190. But when He gave them a Salih (good in every aspect) child, they ascribed partners to Him (Allah)in that which He has given to them. High be Allah, Exalted above all that they ascribe as partners to Him. (Tafsir At-Tabaree, Vol.9, Page 148).
191. Do they attribute as partners to Allah those who created nothing but they themselves are created?
192. No help can they give them, nor can they help themselves.
193. And if you call them to guidance, they follow you not. It is the same for you whether you call them or you keep silent.
194. Verily, those whom you call upon besides Allah are slaves like you. So call upon them and let them answer you if you are truthful.
195. Have they feet wherewith they walk? Or have they hands wherewith they hold? Or have they eyes wherewith they see? Or have they ears wherewith they hear? Say (O Muhammad SAW): "Call your (socalled) partners (of Allah) and then plot against me, and give me no respite!
196. "Verily, my Walee (Protector, Supporter, and Helper, etc.) is Allah Who has revealed the Book (the Quran), and He protects (supports and helps) the righteous.
197. "And those whom you call upon besides Him (Allah) cannot help you nor can they help themselves."
198. And if you call them to guidance, they hear not and you will see them looking at you, yet they see not.
199. Show forgiveness, enjoin what is good, and turn away from the foolish (i.e. dont punish them).
200. And if an evil whisper comes to you from Shaitan (Satan) then seek refuge with Allah. Verily, He is All-Hearer, All-Knower.
201. Verily, those who are Al-Muttaqoon (the pious - see V.2:2), when an evil thought comes to them from Shaitan (Satan), they remember (Allah), and (indeed) they then see (aright).
202. But (as for) their brothers (the devils) they (i.e. the devils) plunge them deeper into error, and they never stop short.
203. And if you do not bring them a miracle (according to their (i.e. Quraish-pagans) proposal), they say: "Why have you not brought it?" Say: "I but follow what is revealed to me from my Lord. This (the Quran) is nothing but evidences from your Lord, and a guidance and a mercy for a people who believe."
204. So, when the Quran is recited, listen to it, and be silent that you may receive mercy. (i.e. during the compulsory congregational prayers when the Imam (of a mosque) is leading the prayer (except Soorat Al-Fatiha), and also when he is delivering the Friday-prayer Khutbah). (Tafsir At-Tabari, Vol.9, Pages
162-4)
205. And remember your Lord by your tongue and within yourself, humbly and with fear without loudness in words in the mornings, and in the afternoons and be not of those who are neglectful.
206. Surely, those who are with your Lord (angels) are never too proud to perform acts of worship to Him, but they glorify His Praise and prostrate before Him