1. A questioner asked concerning a torment about to befall
2. Upon the disbelievers, which none can avert,
3. From Allah, the Lord of the ways of ascent.
4. The angels and the Rooh (Jibrael (Gabriel)) ascend to Him in a Day the measure whereof is fifty thousand years,
5. So be patient (O Muhammad SAW ), with a good patience.
6. Verily! They see it (the torment) afar off,
7. But We see it (quite) near.
8. The Day that the sky will be like the boiling filth of oil, (or molten copper or silver or lead, etc.).
9. And the mountains will be like flakes of wool,
10. And no friend will ask of a friend,
11. Though they shall be made to see one another ((i.e. on the Day of Resurrection), there will be none but see his father, children and relatives, but he will neither speak to them nor will ask them for any help)), - the Mujrim, (criminal, sinner, disbeliever, etc.) would desire to ransom himself from the punishment of that Day by his children.
12. And his wife and his brother,
13. And his kindred who sheltered him,
14. And all that are in the earth, so that it might save him .
15. By no means! Verily, it will be the Fire of Hell!
16. Taking away (burning completely) the head skin!
17. Calling: "(O Kafir (O disbeliever in Allah, His angels, His Book, His Messengers, Day of Resurrection and in Al-Qadar (Divine Preordainments), O Mushrik (O polytheist, disbeliever in the Oneness of Allah)) (all) such as turn their backs and turn away their faces (from Faith) (picking and swallowing them up from that great gathering of mankind (on the Day of Resurrection) just as a bird picks up a food-grain from the earth with its beak and swallows it up) (Tafsir Al-Qurtubee, Vol. 18,Page 289)
18. And collect (wealth) and hide it (from spending it in the Cause of Allah).
19. Verily, man (disbeliever) was created very impatient;
20. Irritable (discontented) when evil touches him;
21. And niggardly when good touches him;22. Except those devoted to Salat (prayers)
23. Those who remain constant in their Salat (prayers);
24. And those in whose wealth there is a known right,
25. For the beggar who asks, and for the unlucky who has lost his property and wealth, (and his means of living has been straitened);
26. And those who believe in the Day of Recompense,
27. And those who fear the torment of their Lord,
28. Verily! The torment of their Lord is that before which none can feel secure,
29. And those who guard their chastity (i.e. private parts from illegal sexual acts) .
30. Except with their wives and the (women slaves and captives) whom their right hands possess, for (then) they are not to be blamed,
31. But whosoever seeks beyond that, then it is those who are trespassers.
32. And those who keep their trusts and covenants;
33. And those who stand firm in their testimonies;
34. And those who guard their Salat (prayers) well,
35. Such shall dwell in the Gardens (i.e. Paradise) honoured.
36. So what is the matter with those who disbelieve that they hasten to listen from you (O Muhammad SAW), in order to belie you and to mock at you, and at Allahs Book (this Quran).
37. (Sitting) in groups on the right and on the left (of you, O Muhammad SAW)?
38. Does every man of them hope to enter the Paradise of delight?
39. No, that is not like that! Verily, We have created them out of that which they know!
40. So I swear by the Lord of all (the three hundred and sixty (360)) points of sunrise and sunset in the east and the west that surely We are Able
41. To replace them by (others) better than them; and We are not to be outrun.
42. So leave them to plunge in vain talk and play about, until they meet their Day which they are promised.
43. The Day when they will come out of the graves quickly as racing to a goal,
44. With their eyes lowered in fear and humility, ignominy covering them (all over)! That is the Day which they were promised