1. By those (angels) who pull out (the souls of the disbelievers and the wicked) with great violence;
2. By those (angels) who gently take out (the souls of the believers);
3. And by those that swim along (i.e. angels or planets in their orbits, etc.).
4. And by those that press forward as in a race (i.e. the angels or stars or the horses, etc.).
5. And by those angels who arrange to do the Commands of their Lord, (so verily, you disbelievers will be called to account).
6. On the Day (when the first blowing of the Trumpet is blown), the earth and the mountains will shake violently (and everybody will die),
7. The second blowing of the Trumpet follows it (and everybody will be raised up),
8. (Some) hearts that Day will shake with fear and anxiety.
9. Their eyes cast down.
10. They say: "Shall we indeed be returned to (our) former state of life?
11. "Even after we are crumbled bones?"
12. They say: "It would in that case, be a return with loss!"
13. But only, it will be a single Zajrah (shout (i.e., the second blowing of the Trumpet)). (See Verse
37:19).
14. When, behold, they find themselves over the earth alive after their death,
15. Has there come to you the story of Moosa (Moses)?
16. When his Lord called him in the sacred valley of Toowa,
17. Go to Firaun (Pharaoh), verily, he has transgressed all bounds (in crimes, sins, polytheism, disbelief,etc.).
18. And say to him: "Would you purify yourself (from the sin of disbelief by becoming a believer)",
19. And that I guide you to your Lord, so you should fear Him?
20. Then (Moosa (Moses)) showed him the great sign (miracles).
21. But (Firaun (Pharaoh)) belied and disobeyed;
22. Then he turned his back, striving hard (against Allah).
23. Then he gathered his people and cried aloud,
24. Saying: "I am your lord, most high",
25. So Allah, seized him with punishment for his last (i.e. his saying: "I am your lord, most high") (see Verse 79:24)) and first ((i.e. his saying, "O chiefs! I know not that you have a god other than I" (see Verse 28:38)) transgression.
26. Verily, in this is an instructive admonition for whosoever fears Allah.
27. Are you more difficult to create, or is the heaven that He constructed?
28. He raised its height, and He has equally ordered it,
29. Its night He covers with darkness, and its forenoon He brings out (with light).
30. And after that He spread the earth;
31. And brought forth therefrom its water and its pasture;
32. And the mountains He has fixed firmly;
33. (To be) a provision and benefit for you and your cattle.
34. But when there comes the greatest catastrophe (i.e. the Day of Recompense, etc.),
35. The Day when man shall remember what he strove for,
36. And Hell-fire shall be made apparent in full view for (every) one who sees,
37. Then, for him who Tagha (transgressed all bounds, in disbelief, oppression and evil deeds of disobedience to Allah).
38. And preferred the life of this world (by following his evil desires and lusts),
39. Verily, his abode will be Hell-fire;
40. But as for him who feared standing before his Lord, and restrained himself from impure evil desires,and lusts.
41. Verily, Paradise will be his abode.
42. They ask you (O Muhammad (Peace be upon him)) about the Hour, - when will be its appointed time?
43. You have no knowledge to say anything about it,
44. To your Lord belongs (the knowledge of) the term thereof?
45. You (O Muhammad (Peace be upon him)) are only a warner for those who fear it,
46. The Day they see it, (it will be) as if they had not tarried (in this world) except an afternoon or a morning