1. (The Prophet (Peace be upon him)) frowned and turned away,
2. Because there came to him the blind man (i.e. Abdullah bin Umm-Maktoom, who came to the Prophet (Peace be upon him) while he was preaching to one or some of the Quraish chiefs).
3. But what could tell you that per chance he might become pure (from sins)?
4. Or that he might receive admonition, and that the admonition might profit him?
5. As for him who thinks himself self-sufficient,
6. To him you attend;
7. What does it matter to you if he will not become pure (from disbelief, you are only a Messenger, your duty is to convey the Message of Allah).
8. But as to him who came to you running.
9. And is afraid (of Allah and His Punishment),
10. Of him you are neglectful and divert your attention to another,
11. Nay, (do not do like this), indeed it (these Verses of this Quran) are an admonition,
12. So whoever wills, let him pay attention to it.
13. (It is) in Records held (greatly) in honour (Al-Lauh Al-Mahfooz).
14. Exalted (in dignity), purified,
15. In the hands of scribes (angels).
16. Honourable and obedient.
17. Be cursed (the disbelieving) man! How ungrateful he is!
18. From what thing did He create him?
19. From Nutfah (male and female semen drops) He created him, and then set him in due proportion;
20. Then He makes the Path easy for him;
21. Then He causes him to die, and puts him in his grave;
22. Then, when it is His Will, He will resurrect him (again).
23. Nay, but (man) has not done what He commanded him.
24. Then let man look at his food,
25. That We pour forth water in abundance,
26. And We split the earth in clefts,
27. And We cause therein the grain to grow,
28. And grapes and clover plants (i.e. green fodder for the cattle),
29. And olives and date-palms,
30. And gardens, dense with many trees,
31. And fruits and Abba (herbage, etc.),
32. (To be) a provision and benefit for you and your cattle.
33. Then, when there comes As-Sakhkhah (the Day of Resurrections second blowing of Trumpet),
34. That Day shall a man flee from his brother,
35. And from his mother and his father,
36. And from his wife and his children.
37. Everyman, that Day, will have enough to make him careless of others.
38. Some faces that Day, will be bright (true believers of Islamic Monotheism).
39. Laughing, rejoicing at good news (of Paradise).
40. And other faces, that Day, will be dust-stained;
41. Darkness will cover them,
42. Such will be the Kafarah (disbelievers in Allah, in His Oneness, and in His Messenger Muhammad (Peace be upon him), etc.), the Fajarah (wicked evil doers)