1. Freedom from (all) obligations (is declared) from Allah and His Messenger (SAW) to those of the Mushrikoon (polytheists, pagans, idolaters, disbelievers in the Oneness of Allah), with whom you made a treaty.
2. So travel freely (O Mushrikoon - see V.2:105) for four months (as you will) throughout the land, but know that you cannot escape (from the Punishment of) Allah, and Allah will disgrace the disbelievers.
3. And a declaration from Allah and His Messenger to mankind on the greatest day (the 10th of DhulHijjah - the 12th month of Islamic calendar) that Allah is free from (all) obligations to the Mushrikoon (see V.2:105) and so is His Messenger. So if you (Mushrikoon) repent, it is better for you, but if you turn away, then know that you cannot escape (from the Punishment of) Allah. And give tidings (O Muhammad SAW) of a painful torment to those who disbelieve.
4. Except those of the Mushrikoon with whom you have a treaty, and who have not subsequently failed you in aught, nor have supported anyone against you. So fulfill their treaty to them to the end of their term. Surely Allah loves Al- Mattaqoon (the pious - see V.2:2).
5. Then when the Sacred Months (the Ist, 7th, 11th, and 12th months of the Islamic calendar) have passed, then kill the Mushrikoon (see V.2:105) wherever you find them, and capture them and besiege them, and prepare for them each and every ambush. But if they repent and perform As-Salat (Iqamat-asSalat), and give Zakat, then leave their way free. Verily, Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.
6. And if anyone of the Mushrikoon (polytheists, idolaters, pagans, disbelievers in the Oneness of Allah)seeks your protection then grant him protection, so that he may hear the Word of Allah (the Quran), and then escort him to where he can be secure, that is because they are men who know not.
7. How can there be a covenant with Allah and with His Messenger for the Mushrikoon (polytheists,idolaters, pagans, disbelievers in the Oneness of Allah) except those with whom you made a covenant near Al-Masjid-al-Haram (at Makkah)? So long, as they are true to you, stand you true to them. Verily,Allah loves Al-Muttaqoon (the pious - see V.2:2).
8. How (can there be such a covenant with them) that when you are overpowered by them, they regard not the ties, either of kinship or of covenant with you? With (good words from) their mouths they please you, but their hearts are averse to you, and most of them are Fasiqoon (rebellious, disobedient to Allah).
9. They have purchased with the Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.) of Allah a little gain, and they hindered men from His Way; evil indeed is that which they used to do.
10. With regard to a believer, they respect not the ties, either of kinship or of covenant! It is they who are the transgressors.
11. But if they repent, perform As-Salat (Iqamat-as-Salat) and give Zakat, then they are your brethren in religion. (In this way) We explain the Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.) in detail for a people who know.
12. But if they violate their oaths after their covenant, and attack your religion with disapproval and criticism then fight (you) the leaders of disbelief (chiefs of Quraish - pagans of Makkah) - for surely their oaths are nothing to them - so that they may stop (evil actions).
13. Will you not fight a people who have violated their oaths (pagans of Makkah) and intended to expel the Messenger, while they did attack you first? Do you fear them? Allah has more right that you should fear Him, if you are believers.
14. Fight against them so that Allah will punish them by your hands and disgrace them and give you victory over them and heal the breasts of a believing people,
15. And remove the anger of their (believers) hearts. Allah accepts the repentance of whom He wills.Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
16. Do you think that you shall be left alone while Allah has not yet tested those among you who have striven hard and fought and have not taken Waleejah ((Batanah - helpers, advisors and consultants from disbelievers, pagans, etc.) giving openly to them their secrets) besides Allah and His Messenger, and the believers. Allah is Well-Acquainted with what you do.
17. It is not for the Mushrikoon (polytheists, idolaters, pagans, disbelievers in the Oneness of Allah), to maintain the Mosques of Allah (i.e. to pray and worship Allah therein, to look after their cleanliness and their building, etc.), while they witness against their ownselves of disbelief. The works of such are in vain and in Fire shall they abide.
18. The Mosques of Allah shall be maintained only by those who believe in Allah and the Last Day;perform As-Salat (Iqamat-as-Salat), and give Zakat and fear none but Allah. It is they who are expected to be on true guidance.
19. Do you consider the providing of drinking water to the pilgrims and the maintenance of Al-Masjidal-Haram (at Makkah) as equal to the worth of those who believe in Allah and the Last Day, and strive hard and fight in the Cause of Allah? They are not equal before Allah. And Allah guides not those people who are the Zalimoon (polytheists and wrong-doers).
20. Those who believed (in the Oneness of Allah - Islamic Monotheism) and emigrated and strove hard and fought in Allahs Cause with their wealth and their lives are far higher in degree with Allah. They are the successful.
21. Their Lord gives them glad tidings of a Mercy from Him, and that He is pleased (with them), and of Gardens (Paradise) for them wherein are everlasting delights.
22. They will dwell therein forever. Verily, with Allah is a great reward.
23. O you who believe! Take not for Auliya (supporters and helpers) your fathers and your brothers if they prefer disbelief to Belief. And whoever of you does so, then he is one of the Zalimoon (wrongdoers, etc.).
24. Say: If your fathers, your sons, your brothers, your wives, your kindred, the wealth that you have gained, the commerce in which you fear a decline, and the dwellings in which you delight … are dearer to you than Allah and His Messenger, and striving hard and fighting in His Cause, then wait until Allah brings about His Decision (torment). And Allah guides not the people who are Al-Fasiqoon (the rebellious, disobedient to Allah).
25. Truly Allah has given you victory on many battle fields, and on the Day of Hunain (battle) when you rejoiced at your great number but it availed you naught and the earth, vast as it is, was straitened for you,then you turned back in flight.
26. Then Allah did send down His Sakeenah (calmness, tranquillity and reassurance, etc.) on the Messenger (Muhammad SAW), and on the believers, and sent down forces (angels) which you saw not,and punished the disbelievers. Such is the recompense of disbelievers.
27. Then after that Allah will accept the repentance of whom He will. And Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.
28. O you who believe (in Allahs Oneness and in His Messenger (Muhammad SAW)! Verily, the Mushrikoon (polytheists, pagans, idolaters, disbelievers in the Oneness of Allah, and in the Message of Muhammad SAW) are Najasun (impure). So let them not come near Al-Masjid-al-Haram (at Makkah)after this year, and if you fear poverty, Allah will enrich you if He will, out of His Bounty. Surely, Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
29. Fight against those who (1) believe not in Allah, (2) nor in the Last Day, (3) nor forbid that which has been forbidden by Allah and His Messenger (4) and those who acknowledge not the religion of truth (i.e. Islam) among the people of the Scripture (Jews and Christians), until they pay the Jizyah with willing submission, and feel themselves subdued.
30. And the Jews say: Uzair (Ezra) is the son of Allah, and the Christians say: Messiah is the son of Allah. That is a saying from their mouths. They imitate the saying of the disbelievers of old. Allahs Curse be on them, how they are deluded away from the truth!
31. They (Jews and Christians) took their rabbis and their monks to be their lords besides Allah (by obeying them in things which they made lawful or unlawful according to their own desires without being ordered by Allah), and (they also took as their Lord) Messiah, son of Maryam (Mary), while they (Jews and Christians) were commanded (in the Taurat (Torah) and the Injeel (Gospel)) to worship none but One Ilah (God - Allah) La ilaha illa Huwa (none has the right to be worshipped but He). Praise and glory be to Him, (far above is He) from having the partners they associate (with Him)."
32. They (the disbelievers, the Jews and the Christians) want to extinguish Allahs Light (with which Muhammad SAW has been sent - Islamic Monotheism) with their mouths, but Allah will not allow except that His Light should be perfected even though the Kafiroon (disbelievers) hate (it).
33. It is He Who has sent His Messenger (Muhammad SAW) with guidance and the religion of truth (Islam), to make it superior over all religions even though the Mushrikoon (polytheists, pagans,idolaters, disbelievers in the Oneness of Allah) hate (it).
34. O you who believe! Verily, there are many of the (Jewish) rabbis and the (Christian) monks who devour the wealth of mankind in falsehood, and hinder (them) from the Way of Allah (i.e. Allahs Religion of Islamic Monotheism). And those who hoard up gold and silver (Al-Kanz: the money, the Zakat of which has not been paid), and spend it not in the Way of Allah, -announce unto them a painful torment.
35. On the Day when that (Al-Kanz: money, gold and silver, etc., the Zakat of which has not been paid)will be heated in the Fire of Hell and with it will be branded their foreheads, their flanks, and their backs, (and it will be said unto them):-"This is the treasure which you hoarded for yourselves. Now taste of what you used to hoard."
36. Verily, the number of months with Allah is twelve months (in a year), so was it ordained by Allah on the Day when He created the heavens and the earth; of them four are Sacred, (i.e. the 1st, the 7th, the
11th and the 12th months of the Islamic calendar). That is the right religion, so wrong not yourselves therein, and fight against the Mushrikoon (polytheists, pagans, idolaters, disbelievers in the Oneness of Allah) collectively, as they fight against you collectively. But know that Allah is with those who are AlMuttaqoon (the pious - see V.2:2).
37. The postponing (of a Sacred Month) is indeed an addition to disbelief: thereby the disbelievers are led astray, for they make it lawful one year and forbid it another year in order to adjust the number of months forbidden by Allah, and make such forbidden ones lawful. The evil of their deeds seems pleasing to them. And Allah guides not the people, who disbelieve.
38. O you who believe! What is the matter with you, that when you are asked to march forth in the Cause of Allah (i.e. Jihad) you cling heavily to the earth? Are you pleased with the life of this world rather than the Hereafter? But little is the enjoyment of the life of this world as compared with the Hereafter.
39. If you march not forth, He will punish you with a painful torment and will replace you by another people, and you cannot harm Him at all, and Allah is Able to do all things.
40. If you help him (Muhammad SAW) not (it does not matter), for Allah did indeed help him when the disbelievers drove him out, the second of two, when they (Muhammad SAW and Abu Bakr ÑÖì ) were in the cave, and he (SAW) said to his companion (Abu Bakr ÑÖì ): "Be not sad (or afraid), surely Allah is with us." Then Allah sent down His Sakeenah (calmness, tranquillity, peace, etc.) upon him, and strengthened him with forces (angels) which you saw not, and made the word of those who disbelieved the lowermost, while it was the Word of Allah that became the uppermost, and Allah is All-Mighty, AllWise.
41. March forth, whether you are light (being healthy, young and wealthy) or heavy (being ill, old and poor), strive hard with your wealth and your lives in the Cause of Allah. This is better for you, if you but knew.
42. Had it been a near gain (booty in front of them) and an easy journey, they would have followed you,but the distance (Tabuk expedition) was long for them, and they would swear by Allah, "If we only could, we would certainly have come forth with you." They destroy their ownselves, and Allah knows that they are liars.
43. May Allah forgive you (O Muhammad SAW). Why did you grant them leave (for remaining behind,you should have persisted as regards your order to them to proceed on Jihad), until those who told the truth were seen by you in a clear light, and you had known the liars?
44. Those who believe in Allah and the Last Day would not ask your leave to be exempted from fighting with their properties and their lives, and Allah is the All-Knower of Al-Muttaqoon (the pious - see V.2:2).
45. It is only those who believe not in Allah and the Last Day and whose hearts are in doubt that ask your leave (to be exempted from Jihad). So in their doubts they waver.
46. And if they had intended to march out, certainly, they would have made some preparation for it, but Allah was averse to their being sent forth, so He made them lag behind, and it was said (to them), "Sit you among those who sit (at home)."
47. Had they marched out with you, they would have added to you nothing except disorder, and they would have hurried about in your midst (spreading corruption) and sowing sedition among you, and there are some among you who would have listened to them. And Allah is the All-Knower of the Zalimoon (polytheists and wrong-doers, etc.).
48. Verily, they had plotted sedition before, and had upset matters for you, - until the truth (victory)came and the Decree of Allah (His Religion, Islam) became manifest though they hated it.
49. And among them is he who says:"Grant me leave (to be exempted from Jihad) and put me not into trial." Surely, they have fallen into trial. And verily, Hell is surrounding the disbelievers.
50. If good befalls you (O Muhammad SAW), it grieves them, but if a calamity overtakes you, they say:"We took our precaution beforehand," and they turn away rejoicing.
51. Say: "Nothing shall ever happen to us except what Allah has ordained for us. He is our Maula (Lord,Helper and Protector)." And in Allah let the believers put their trust.
52. Say: "Do you wait for us (anything) except one of the two best things (martyrdom or victory); while we await for you either that Allah will afflict you with a punishment from Himself or at our hands. So wait, we too are waiting with you."
53. Say: "Spend (in Allahs Cause) willingly or unwillingly, it will not be accepted from you. Verily, you are ever a people who are Fasiqoon (rebellious, disobedient to Allah)."
54. And nothing prevents their contributions from being accepted from them except that they disbelieved in Allah and in His Messenger (Muhammad SAW); and that they came not to As-Salat (the prayer) except in a lazy state; and that they offer not contributions but unwillingly.
55. So let not their wealth or their children amaze you (O Muhammad SAW); in reality Allahs Plan is to punish them with these things in the life of the this world, and that their souls shall depart (die) while they are disbelievers.
56. They swear by Allah that they are truly of you while they are not of you, but they are a people (hypocrites) who are afraid (that you may kill them).
57. Should they find a refuge, or caves, or a place of concealment, they would turn straightway thereto with a swift rush.
58. And of them are some who accuse you (O Muhammad SAW) in the matter of (the distribution of)the alms. If they are given part thereof, they are pleased, but if they are not given thereof, behold! They are enraged!
59. Would that they were contented with what Allah and His Messenger (SAW) gave them and had said:"Allah is Sufficient for us. Allah will give us of His Bounty, and (also) His Messenger (from alms, etc.).We implore Allah (to enrich us)."
60. As-Sadaqat (here it means Zakat) are only for the Fuqara (poor), and Al-Masakin (the poor) and those employed to collect (the funds); and for to attract the hearts of those who have been inclined (towards Islam); and to free the captives; and for those in debt; and for Allahs Cause (i.e. for Mujahidoon - those fighting in the holy wars), and for the wayfarer (a traveller who is cut off from everything); a duty imposed by Allah. And Allah is All-Knower, All-Wise.
61. And among them are men who hurt the Prophet (Muhammad SAW) and say: "He is (lending his) ear (to every news)." Say: "He listens to what is best for you; he believes in Allah; has faith in the believers;and is a mercy to those of you who believe." But those who hurt Allahs Messenger (Muhammad SAW)will have a painful torment.
62. They swear by Allah to you (Muslims) in order to please you, but it is more fitting that they should please Allah and His Messenger (Muhammad SAW), if they are believers.
63. Know they not that whoever opposes and shows hostility to Allah (ÚÒ æ Ìá) and His Messenger (SAW), certainly for him will be the Fire of Hell to abide therein. That is extreme disgrace.
64. The hypocrites fear lest a Soorah (chapter of the Quran) should be revealed about them, showing them what is in their hearts. Say: "(Go ahead and) mock! But certainly Allah will bring to light all that you fear."
65. If you ask them (about this), they declare: "We were only talking idly and joking." Say: "Was it at Allah (ÚÒ æ Ìá), and His Ayat (proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations, etc.) and His Messenger (SAW) that you were mocking?"
66. Make no excuse; you have disbelieved after you had believed. If We pardon some of you, We will punish others amongst you because they were Mujrimoon (disbelievers, polytheists, sinners, criminals,etc.).
67. The hypocrites, men and women, are from one another, they enjoin (on the people) Al-Munkar (i.e.disbelief and polytheism of all kinds and all that Islam has forbidden), and forbid (people) from AlMaroof (i.e. Islamic Monotheism and all that Islam orders one to do), and they close their hands (from giving (spending in Allahs Cause) alms, etc.). They have forgotten Allah, so He has forgotten them.Verily, the hypocrites are the Fasiqoon (rebellious, disobedient to Allah).
68. Allah has promised the hypocrites; men and women, and the disbelievers, the Fire of Hell, therein shall they abide. It will suffice them. Allah has cursed them and for them is the lasting torment.
69. Like those before you, they were mightier than you in power, and more abundant in wealth and children. They had enjoyed their portion awhile, so enjoy your portion awhile as those before you enjoyed their portion awhile; and you indulged in play and pastime (and in telling lies against Allah and His Messenger Muhammad SAW) as they indulged in play and pastime. Such are they whose deeds are in vain in this world and in the Hereafter. Such are they who are the losers.
70. Has not the story reached them of those before them? - The people of Nooh (Noah), Ad, and Thamood, the people of Ibraheem (Abraham), the dwellers of Madyan (Midian) and the cities overthrown (i.e. the people to whom Lout (Lot) preached), to them came their Messengers with clear proofs. So it was not Allah Who wronged them, but they used to wrong themselves.
71. The believers, men and women, are Auliya (helpers, supporters, friends, protectors) of one another,they enjoin (on the people) Al-Maroof (i.e. Islamic Monotheism and all that Islam orders one to do), and forbid (people) from Al-Munkar (i.e. polytheism and disbelief of all kinds, and all that Islam has forbidden); they perform As-Salat (Iqamat-as-Salat) and give the Zakat, and obey Allah and His Messenger. Allah will have His Mercy on them. Surely Allah is All-Mighty, All-Wise.
72. Allah has promised to the believers -men and women, - Gardens under which rivers flow to dwell therein forever, and beautiful mansions in Gardens of Adn (Eden Paradise). But the greatest bliss is the Good Pleasure of Allah. That is the supreme success.
73. O Prophet (Muhammad SAW)! Strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites, and be harsh against them, their abode is Hell, - and worst indeed is that destination.
74. They swear by Allah that they said nothing (bad), but really they said the word of disbelief, and they disbelieved after accepting Islam, and they resolved that (plot to murder Prophet Muhammad SAW)which they were unable to carry out, and they could not find any cause to do so except that Allah and His Messenger had enriched them of His Bounty. If then they repent, it will be better for them, but if they turn away, Allah will punish them with a painful torment in this worldly life and in the Hereafter.And there is none for them on earth as a Walee (supporter, protector) or a helper.
75. And of them are some who made a covenant with Allah (saying): "If He bestowed on us of His Bounty, we will verily, give Sadaqah (Zakat and voluntary charity in Allahs Cause) and will be certainly among those who are righteous."
76. Then when He gave them of His Bounty, they became niggardly (refused to pay the Sadaqah (Zakat or voluntary charity)), and turned away, averse.
77. So He punished them by putting hypocrisy into their hearts till the Day whereon they shall meet Him, because they broke that (covenant with Allah) which they had promised Him and because they used to tell lies.
78. Know they not that Allah knows their secret ideas, and their Najwa (secret counsels), and that Allah is the All-Knower of the unseen.
79. Those who defame such of the believers who give charity (in Allahs Cause) voluntarily, and those who could not find to give charity (in Allahs Cause) except what is available to them, so they mock at them (believers), Allah will throw back their mockery on them, and they shall have a painful torment.
80. Whether you (O Muhammad SAW) ask forgiveness for them (hypocrites) or ask not forgiveness for them … (and even) if you ask seventy times for their forgiveness … Allah will not forgive them,because they have disbelieved in Allah and His Messenger (Muhammad SAW). And Allah guides not those people who are Fasiqoon (rebellious, disobedient to Allah).
81. Those who stayed away (from Tabuk expedition) rejoiced in their staying behind the Messenger of Allah; they hated to strive and fight with their properties and their lives in the Cause of Allah, and they said: "March not forth in the heat." Say: "The Fire of Hell is more intense in heat", if only they could understand!
82. So let them laugh a little and (they will) cry much as a recompense of what they used to earn (by committing sins).
83. If Allah brings you back to a party of them (the hypocrites), and they ask your permission to go out (to fight), say: "Never shall you go out with me, nor fight an enemy with me; you agreed to sit inactive on the first occasion, then you sit (now) with those who lag behind."
84. And never (O Muhammad SAW) pray (funeral prayer) for any of them (hypocrites) who dies, nor stand at his grave. Certainly they disbelieved in Allah and His Messenger, and died while they were Fasiqoon (rebellious, - disobedient to Allah and His Messenger SAW).
85. And let not their wealth or their children amaze you. Allahs Plan is to punish them with these things in this world, and that their souls shall depart (die) while they are disbelievers.
86. And when a Soorah (chapter from the Quran) is revealed, enjoining them to believe in Allah and to strive hard and fight along with His Messenger, the wealthy among them ask your leave to exempt them (from Jihad) and say, "Leave us (behind), we would be with those who sit (at home)."
87. They are content to be with those (the women) who sit behind (at home). Their hearts are sealed up (from all kinds of goodness and right guidance), so they understand not.
88. But the Messenger (Muhammad SAW) and those who believed with him (in Islamic Monotheism)strove hard and fought with their wealth and their lives (in Allahs Cause). Such are they for whom are the good things, and it is they who will be successful.
89. For them Allah has got ready Gardens (Paradise) under which rivers flow, to dwell therein forever.That is the supreme success.
90. And those who made excuses from the bedouins came (to you, O Prophet SAW) asking your permission to exempt them (from the battle), and those who had lied to Allah and His Messenger sat at home (without asking the permission for it); a painful torment will seize those of them who disbelieve.
91. There is no blame on those who are weak or ill or who find no resources to spend (in holy fighting (Jihad)), if they are sincere and true (in duty) to Allah and His Messenger. No ground (of complaint) can there be against the Muhsinoon (good-doers - see the footnote of V.9:120). And Allah is Oft-Forgiving,Most Merciful.
92. Nor (is there blame) on those who came to you to be provided with mounts, and when you said: "I can find no mounts for you," they turned back, while their eyes overflowing with tears of grief that they could not find anything to spend (for Jihad).
93. The ground (of complaint) is only against those who are rich, and yet ask exemption. They are content to be with (the women) who sit behind (at home) and Allah has sealed up their hearts (from all kinds of goodness and right guidance) so that they know not (what they are losing).
94. They (the hypocrites) will present their excuses to you (Muslims), when you return to them. Say (O Muhammad SAW) "Present no excuses, we shall not believe you. Allah has already informed us of the news concerning you. Allah and His Messenger will observe your deeds. In the end you will be brought back to the All-Knower of the unseen and the seen, then He (Allah) will inform you of what you used to do." (Tafsir At-Tabari)
95. They will swear by Allah to you (Muslims) when you return to them, that you may turn away from them. So turn away from them. Surely, they are Rijsun (i.e. Najasun (impure) because of their evil deeds), and Hell is their dwelling place, - a recompense for that which they used to earn.
96. They (the hypocrites) swear to you (Muslims) that you may be pleased with them, but if you are pleased with them, certainly Allah is not pleased with the people who are Al-Fasiqoon (rebellious,disobedient to Allah).
97. The bedouins are the worst in disbelief and hypocrisy, and more likely to be in ignorance of the limits (Allahs Commandments and His Legal Laws, etc.) which Allah has revealed to His Messenger.And Allah is All-Knower, All-Wise.
98. And of the bedouins there are some who look upon what they spend (in Allahs Cause) as a fine and watch for calamities for you, on them be the calamity of evil. And Allah is All-Hearer, All-Knower.
99. And of the bedouins there are some who believe in Allah and the Last Day, and look upon what they spend in Allahs Cause as approaches to Allah, and a cause of receiving the Messengers invocations.Indeed these (spendings in Allahs Cause) are an approach for them. Allah will admit them to His Mercy.Certainly Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.
100. And the first to embrace Islam of the Muhajiroon (those who migrated from Makkah to AlMadinah) and the Ansar (the citizens of Al-Madinah who helped and gave aid to the Muhajiroon) and also those who followed them exactly (in Faith). Allah is well-pleased with them as they are wellpleased with Him. He has prepared for them Gardens under which rivers flow (Paradise), to dwell therein forever. That is the supreme success.
101. And among the bedouins round about you, some are hypocrites, and so are some among the people of Al-Madinah, they exaggerate and persist in hypocrisy, you (O Muhammad SAW) know them not, We know them. We shall punish them twice, and thereafter they shall be brought back to a great (horrible)torment.
102. And (there are) others who have acknowledged their sins, they have mixed a deed that was righteous with another that was evil. Perhaps Allah will turn unto them in forgiveness. Surely, Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.
103. Take Sadaqah (alms) from their wealth in order to purify them and sanctify them with it, and invoke Allah for them. Verily! Your invocations are a source of security for them, and Allah is AllHearer, All-Knower.
104. Know they not that Allah accepts repentance from His slaves and takes the Sadaqat (alms,charities) and that All&achrc;h Alone is the One Who forgives and accepts repentance, Most Merciful?
105. And say (O Muhammad SAW) "Do deeds! Allah will see your deeds, and (so will) His Messenger and the believers. And you will be brought back to the All-Knower of the unseen and the seen. Then He will inform you of what you used to do."
106. And others await Allahs Decree, whether He will punish them or will forgive them. And Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
107. And as for those who put up a mosque by way of harming and disbelief, and to disunite the believers, and as an outpost for those who warred against Allah and His Messenger (Muhammad SAW)aforetime, they will indeed swear that their intention is nothing but good. Allah bears witness that they are certainly liars.
108. Never stand you therein. Verily, the mosque whose foundation was laid from the first day on piety is more worthy that you stand therein (to pray). In it are men who love to clean and to purify themselves.And Allah loves those who make themselves clean and pure (i.e. who clean their private parts with dust (i.e. to be considered as soap) and water from urine and stools, after answering the call of nature).
109. Is it then he, who laid the foundation of his building on piety to Allah and His Good Pleasure,better, or he who laid the foundation of his building on an undetermined brink of a precipice ready to crumble down, so that it crumbled to pieces with him into the Fire of Hell. And Allah guides not the people who are the Zalimoon (cruel, violent, proud, polytheist and wrong-doer).
110. The building which they built will never cease to be a cause of hypocrisy and doubt in their hearts,unless their hearts are cut to pieces. (i.e. till they die). And Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
111. Verily, Allah has purchased of the believers their lives and their properties; for the price that theirs shall be the Paradise. They fight in Allahs Cause, so they kill (others) and are killed. It is a promise in truth which is binding on Him in the Taurat (Torah) and the Injeel (Gospel) and the Quran. And who is truer to his covenant than Allah? Then rejoice in the bargain which you have concluded. That is the supreme success.
112. (The believers whose lives Allah has purchased are) those who repent to Allah (from polytheism and hypocrisy, etc.), who worship Him, who praise Him, who fast (or go out in Allahs Cause), who bow down (in prayer), who prostrate themselves (in prayer), who enjoin (people) for Al-Maroof (i.e. Islamic Monotheism and all what Islam has ordained) and forbid (people) from Al-Munkar (i.e. disbelief,polytheism of all kinds and all that Islam has forbidden), and who observe the limits set by Allah (do all that Allah has ordained and abstain from all kinds of sins and evil deeds which Allah has forbidden).And give glad tidings to the believers.
113. It is not (proper) for the Prophet and those who believe to ask Allahs Forgiveness for the Mushrikoon (polytheists, idolaters, pagans, disbelievers in the Oneness of Allah) even though they be of kin, after it has become clear to them that they are the dwellers of the Fire (because they died in a state of disbelief).
114. And (Ibraheems (Abraham)) invoking (of Allah) for his fathers forgiveness was only because of a promise he (Ibraheem (Abraham)) had made to him (his father). But when it became clear to him (Ibraheem (Abraham)) that he (his father) is an enemy to Allah, he dissociated himself from him. Verily Ibraheem (Abraham) was Al-Awwah (has fifteen different meanings but the correct one seems to be that he used to invoke Allah with humility, glorify Him and remember Him much), and was forbearing.(Tafsir Al-Qurtubee).
115. And Allah will never lead a people astray after He has guided them until He makes clear to them as to what they should avoid. Verily, Allah is the All-Knower of everything.
116. Verily, Allah! Unto Him belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth, He gives life and He causes death. And besides Allah you have neither any Walee (protector or guardian) nor any helper.
117. Allah has forgiven the Prophet (SAW), the Muhajiroon (Muslim emigrants who left their homes and came to Al-Madinah) and the Ansar (Muslims of Al-Madinah) who followed him (Muhammad SAW) in the time of distress (Tabook expedition, etc.), after the hearts of a party of them had nearly deviated (from the Right Path), but He accepted their repentance. Certainly, He is unto them full of Kindness, Most Merciful.
118. And (He did forgive also) the three (who did not join the Tabook expedition (whom the Prophet SAW)) left (i.e. he did not give his judgement in their case, and their case was suspended for Allahs Decision) till for them the earth, vast as it is, was straitened and their ownselves were straitened to them,and they perceived that there is no fleeing from Allah, and no refuge but with Him. Then, He accepted their repentance, that they might repent (unto Him). Verily, Allah is the One Who accepts repentance,Most Merciful.
119. O you who believe! Be afraid of Allah, and be with those who are true (in words and deeds).
120. It was not becoming of the people of Al-Madinah and the bedouins of the neighbourhood to remain behind Allahs Messenger (Muhammad SAW when fighting in Allahs Cause) and (it was not becoming of them) to prefer their own lives to his life. That is because they suffer neither thirst nor fatigue, nor hunger in the Cause of Allah, nor they take any step to raise the anger of disbelievers nor inflict any injury upon an enemy but is written to their credit as a deed of righteousness. Surely, Allah wastes not the reward of the Muhsinoon
121. Nor do they spend anything (in Allahs Cause) - small or great - nor cross a valley, but is written to their credit, that Allah may recompense them with the best of what they used to do (i.e. Allah will reward their good deeds according to the reward of their best deeds which they did in the most perfect manner).
122. And it is not (proper) for the believers to go out to fight (Jihad) all together. Of every troop of them, a party only should go forth, that they (who are left behind) may get instructions in (Islamic)religion, and that they may warn their people when they return to them, so that they may beware (of evil).
123. O you who believe! Fight those of the disbelievers who are close to you, and let them find harshness in you, and know that Allah is with those who are the Al-Muttaqoon (the pious - see V.2:2).
124. And whenever there comes down a Soorah (chapter from the Quran), some of them (hypocrites)say: "Which of you has had his Faith increased by it?" As for those who believe, it has increased their Faith, and they rejoice.
125. But as for those in whose hearts is a disease (of doubt, disbelief and hypocrisy), it will add suspicion and doubt to their suspicion, disbelief and doubt, and they die while they are disbelievers.
126. See they not that they are tried once or twice every year (with different kinds of calamities, disease,famine, etc.)? Yet, they turn not in repentance, nor do they learn a lesson (from it).
127. And whenever there comes down a Soorah (chapter from the Quran), they look at one another (saying): "Does any one see you?" Then they turn away. Allah has turned their hearts (from the light)because they are a people that understand not.
128. Verily, there has come unto you a Messenger (Muhammad SAW) from amongst yourselves (i.e.whom you know well). It grieves him that you should receive any injury or difficulty. He (Muhammad SAW) is anxious over you (to be rightly guided, to repent to Allah, and beg Him to pardon and forgive your sins, in order that you may enter Paradise and be saved from the punishment of the Hell-fire), for the believers (he SAW is) full of pity, kind, and merciful.
129. . But if they turn away, say (O Muhammad SAW): "Allah is sufficient for me. La ilaha illa Huwa (none has the right to be worshipped but He), in Him I put my trust and He is the Lord of the Mighty Throne.