SAD. I CALL to witness the admonishing Qur'an.
But the unbelievers are still full of pride and hostility.
How many generations have We destroyed before them who cried (for mercy) when it was too late for escape.
They were surprised that one of them had come to them as warner; and the unbelievers said: "He is a deceiving sorcerer.
Has he turned so many gods into one deity? This is indeed a strange thing!"
And their leading chiefs said: "Remain attached to your gods. There is surely some motive behind it.
We never heard of it in the former faith. It is surely a fabrication.
To him of all of us has the Reminder been sent down?" They are still in doubt about My admonition; but they have not tasted My punishment yet!
Do they have the stores of the mercy of your Lord, the mighty and munificent?
Or is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them, theirs? Then let them climb up the ladders (to the heavens).
They will be one more army vanquished among the many routed hordes.
Even before them the people of Noah, 'Ad, the mighty Pharoah,
And the Thamud, the people of Lot, as well as the dwellers of the Wood, had denied. These were the hordes.
Of all these there was not one who did not deny the messengers. So My retribution was justified.
They await but a single blast which will not be repeated.
Still they say: "O Lord, give us our share before the Day of Reckoning."
Bear with patience what they say, and remember Our votary David, man of strength. He surely turned to Us in penitence.
We subjugated the chiefs (of tribes) to struggle day and night with him,
And the levied Tair. They were all obedient to him.
So We further strengthened his kingdom, and bestowed wisdom on him, and judgement in legal matters.
Have you heard of the litigants who jumped over the wall into his chamber?
When they came before David, he was frightened of them. "Do not be afraid," they said. "The two of us are disputing the wrong one has done the other. So judge between us with equity, and do not be unjust, and guide us to the right path.
This man here is my brother. He has ninety and nine ewes while I have only one. He demands that I should give him my ewe, and wants to get the better of me in argument."
(David) said: "He is unjust in demanding your ewe to add to his (many) ewes. Many partners are surely -- unjust to one another, except those who believe and do the right; but there are only a few of them." It occurred to David that he was being tried by Us, and he begged his Lord to forgive him, and fell down in homage and repented.
So We forgave him. He has surely a high rank with Us and an excellent place of return.
"O David, We have made you trustee on the earth. So judge between men equitably, and do not follow your lust lest it should lead you astray from the way of God. Surely for those who go astray from the way of God, is severe punishment, for having forgotten the Day of Reckoning.
We have not created the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them, all for nothing. Only those who deny imagine so. So for the unbelievers there is woe from the fire.
Should We equate those who do the right with those who spread corruption in the land? Should We make those who are morally integrated equal to those who seek disintegration?
We have sent down a Book to you which is blessed, so that people may apply their minds to its revelations, and the men of wisdom may reflect.
We bestowed Solomon on David who was an excellent devotee, for he turned to God in penitence.
When they brought fleet-footed chargers in the evening to show him,
He said: "The love of horses is worthy of desire to me for the remembrance of my Lord;" and when they were out of sight, (he said):
"Bring them back to me," and he began to rub and stroke their shanks and necks.
We surely tried Solomon, and placed another body on his throne. So he turned to God
Saying: "O Lord, forgive me, and give me such a dominion as none will merit after me. You are the great bestower."
So we subjugated the wind to his service which carried his merchandise wheresoever he wished;
And the devils -- the builders and divers of all kinds,
And many others bound in bond.
"This is Our gift," (We said to him), "so bestow freely or withhold without reckoning."
He has a high position with Us and an excellent abode.
Remember Our votary Job because he called to his Lord: "Satan has afflicted me with disease and distress."
"Go swiftly to the spring," (We said). "This cold water is for bathing and for drinking."
We restored his family to him with others similar to them, as a blessing from Us and a reminder for men of wisdom. --
"Take a handful of herbs," (We said to him), and apply and rub them, and do not make a mistake." We found him patient in adversity, an excellent devotee, always turning in repentance.
Remember Our votaries Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, men of power and insight.
We distinguished them for the distinct remembrance of the abode (of the Hereafter).
They are the chosen ones, the excellent in Our sight.
And remember Ishmael, Elisha and Dhu'l-Kifl. Every one of them is among the best.
This is a commemoration. Surely for those who take heed for themselves is an excellent place of return --
Gardens of Eden with gates open wide to them,
Where they will take their ease, calling for fruits in plenty, and for wine,
With companions of modest look, the same in age, by their side.
This is what is promised you for the Day of Reckoning.
This is surely Our provision never-ending.
This (for the virtuous); but for the transgressors the evil destination,
Hell, in which they will burn. How vile a resting place!
There will be boiling water for them and cold, clammy, fetid drink to taste,
And other similar torments.
Here is a multitude rushing headlong with you. There is no welcome for them. They will roast in the fire.
They will say: "In fact, it is you who will have no welcome. It is you who brought this upon us. What an evil place of rest!"
They will say: "O Lord, give him who has brought this upon us two times more the torment of Hell;"
And will add: "O what has happened to us that we do not see the men we counted among the wicked.
Did we laugh at them (for nothing), or our eyes fail to pick them out?"
This contending of the inmates of Hell will surely be real.
Say: "I am only a warner, and there is no other god but God, the one, the omnipotent,
Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them, all-mighty, all-forgiving."
Say: "This is a momentous message,
To which you pay no heed.
I had no knowledge of the higher Assembly when they discussed it among themselves.
Only this has been revealed to me that I am a distinct warner.
When your Lord said to the angels: "I am going to create a man from clay;
And when I have made him and have breathed into him of My spirit. Fall down in homage before him."
Then the angels bowed before him in a body,
Except Iblis. He was filled with pride and turned an unbeliever.
Said (God): "O Iblis, what hindered you from adoring what I created by My own authority? Are you too proud, or too high and mighty?"
He said: "I am better than he. You created me from fire, and him from clay."
(God) said: "Then go hence, ostracised.
Upon you will be My damnation till the Day of Doom."
He said: "O Lord, give me respite till the day the dead rise from their graves."
(God) said: "You have the respite
Till the appointed day."
He said: "By Your authority, I will lead them astray,
Other than the chosen ones among Your creatures."
(God) said: "This is right by Me, and what I say is right.
I will fill up Hell with you together with those who follow you."
Say: "I do not ask any compensation of you for it, nor am I a specious pretender.
This is only a warning for mankind.
You will come to know its truth in time."