THOSE WHO DISBELIEVE and obstruct (others) from the way of God will have wasted their deeds.
But those who believe and do the right, and believe what has been revealed to Muhammad, which is the truth from their Lord, will have their faults condoned by Him and their state improved.
That is because those who refuse to believe only follow what is false; but those who believe follow the truth from their Lord. That is how God gives men precepts of wisdom.
So, when you clash with the unbelievers, smite their necks until you overpower them, then hold them in bondage. Then either free them graciously or after taking a ransom, until war shall have come to end. If God had pleased He could have punished them (Himself), but He wills to test some of you through some others. He will not allow the deeds of those who are killed in the cause of God to go waste.
He will show them the way, and better their state,
And will admit them into gardens with which he has acquainted them.
O you who believe, if you help (in the cause of) God He will surely come to your aid, and firmly plant your feet.
As for the unbelievers, they will suffer misfortunes, and their deeds will be rendered ineffective.
That is so as they were averse to what has been revealed by God, and their actions will be nullified.
Have they not journeyed in the land and seen the fate of those before them? Destroyed they were utterly by God; and a similar (fate) awaits the unbelievers.
This is so for God is the friend of those who believe while the unbelievers have no friend.
Verily God will admit those who believe and do the right into gardens with streams of water running by. But the unbelievers revel and carouse and subsist like beasts, and Hell will be their residence.
How many were the habitations, mightier than your city which has turned you out, which We destroyed; and they did not have a helper.
Can one who stands on a clear proof from his Lord, be like one enamoured of his evil deeds and follows his inane desires?
The semblance of Paradise promised the pious and devout (is that of a garden) with streams of water that will not go rank, and rivers of milk whose taste will not undergo a change, and rivers of wine delectable to drinkers, and streams of purified honey, and fruits of every kind in them, and forgiveness of their Lord. Are these like those who will live for ever in the Fire and be given boiling water to drink which will cut their intestines to shreds?
There are some who listen to you; but as soon as they go from you they say to those who were given knowledge: "What is this he is saying now?" They are those whose hearts have been sealed by God, and they follow their own lusts.
But those who are rightly guided will be given greater guidance by Him, and they will have their intrinsic piety.
Do they wait for any thing but the Hour (of change), that it may come upon them suddenly? Its signs have already appeared. How then will they be warned when it has come upon them?
Know then, therefore, there is no god but He, and ask forgiveness for your sins and those of believing men and women. God knows your wanderings and your destination.
Those who believe say: "How is it no Surah was revealed?" But when a categorical Surah is revealed that mentions war, you should see those who are sceptical staring at you like a man in the swoon of death. Alas the woe for them!
Obedience and modest speech (would have been more becoming). And when the matter has been determined it is best for them to be true to God.
Is it possible that if placed in authority you will create disorder in the land and sever your bonds of relationship?
They are those who were condemned by God, whose ears were blocked by Him and their eyes blinded.
Do they not ponder on what the Qur'an says? Or have their hearts been sealed with locks?
Those who turn their backs after the way of guidance has been opened to them, have been surely tempted by Satan and beguiled by illusory hopes.
This was so because they said to those who disdain what God has revealed: "We shall obey you in some things." But God knows their secret intentions well.
How will it be when the angels draw out their souls striking their faces and their backs?
Because they followed what displeases God, and they were averse to pleasing Him. So We nullified their deeds.
Do they whose minds are filled with doubt, think that God will not expose their malice?
Had We pleased We could have shown them to you that you could know them by their marks, and recognise them from the way they twist their words. Yet God knows all your deeds.
We shall try you in order to know who are the fighters among you, and who are men of fortitude, and verify your histories.
Surely those who do not believe, and obstruct others from the path of God, and oppose the Prophet after the way of guidance has been opened to them, will not hurt God in the least, and He will nullify all that they have done.
O you who believe, obey God and the Prophet, and do not waste your deeds.
Those who do not believe and obstruct others from the way of God, and die disbelieving, will not be pardoned by God.
So do not become weak-kneed and sue for peace, for you will have the upper hand as God is with you and will not overlook your deeds.
Verily the life of this world is no more than a sport and frivolity. If you believe and fear God, he will give you your reward, and will not ask for your possessions.
If He asks for all you possess and insist upon it, you will become niggardly, and it will bring out your malevolence.
Beware! You are called to spend in the way of God, yet some among you close their fists. But he who is niggardly is so for his own self: God is above need, and it is you who are needy. If you turn away then God will bring other people in your place who, moreover, will not be like you.