SAY: "I HAVE been informed that a number of jinns had listened; then said: 'We have heard the wondrous Qur'an,
Which guides to the right path; and we have come to believe in it, and will not associate any one with our Lord.
Exalted is the glory of our Lord; He has neither wife nor son.
Certainly the foolish among us say preposterous things of God.
We had in fact thought that men and jinns would never speak a lie about God,
But some men used to seek refuge with some jinns, and this increased their waywardness;
So they began to think, even as you do, that God would not resurrect any one.
We sought to pry into the secrets of the heavens, but found it full of fierce guards and shooting flames.
We sat in observatories to listen; but any one who listened found a shooting star in wait for him.
We do not know if this means ill for the dwellers of the earth, or their Lord wishes guidance for them.
For some of us are upright and some otherwise: Surely we follow different ways.
We realised that we could not weaken the power of God on earth, nor outpace Him by running away.
So when we heard the guidance we believed in it; and he who believes in his Lord will neither fear loss nor force.
Some of us have come to submission, and some of us are iniquitous.'" Those who have submitted have taken the right course;
But those who are iniquitous will be fuel for Hell.
(Say): "If they keep to the right path We shall give them water in abundance to drink
In order to try them through it. But whoever turns away from the remembrance of his Lord, will be given increasing torment by Him."
All places of worship are for God; so do not invoke any one with God.
When the devotee of God stood up to invoke Him (the jinns) crowded upon him (to listen).
Say: "I call on my Lord alone and I do not associate any one with Him."
Say: "Neither is your loss within my power nor bringing you to guidance."
Say: "No one can save me from God, nor can I find a place of refuge apart from Him,
Unless I convey from God and deliver His message." For those who disobey God and His Apostle is the fire of Hell, where they will abide for ever;
Until they see what they are promised, when they will understand who is weaker in aid and poorer in numbers.
Say: "I do not know if what is promised you is near, or if my Lord prolongs its term.
He is the knower of the Unknown, and He does not divulge His secret to any one
Other than an apostle He has chosen, when He makes a sentinel walk in front of him and a sentinel behind,
So that He may know if they have delivered their Lord's messages. He comprehends all that has been given them, and keeps count of everything.